
Sacred texts  Thelema 

Based on the Sangreal edition of 1969 e.v., with the "Interlude" restored (absent from the Sangreal edition). Diagrams noted but not described.

Copyright (c) Ordo Templi Orientis
BOOK 4
by FRATER PERDURABO (Aleister Crowley)
and SOROR VIRAKAM (Mary d'Este Sturges)
A NOTE
THIS book is intentionally "not" the work of Frater Perdurabo. Experience shows that his writing is too concentrated, too abstruse, too occult, for ordinary minds to apprehend. It is thought that this record of disjointed fragments of his casual conversation may prove alike more intelligible and more convincing, and at least provide a preliminary study which will enable the student to attack his real work from a standpoint of some little general knowledge and understanding of his ideas, and of the form in which he figures them.

Part II, "Magick," is more advanced in style than Part I; the student is expected to know a little of the literature of the subject, and to be able to take an intelligent view of it. This part is, however, really explanatory of Part I, which is a crude outline sketch only.

If both parts are thoroughly studied and understood, the pupil will have obtained a real grasp of all the fundamentals and essentials of both Magick and Mysticism.

I wrote this book down from Frater Perdurabo's dictation at the Villa Caldarazzo, Posilippo, Naples, where I was studying under him, a villa actually prophesied to us long before we reached Naples by that Brother of the A.'.A.'. who appeared to me in Zurich. Any point which was obscure to me was cleared up in some new discourse (the discourses have consequently been re-arranged). Before printing, the whole work was read by several persons of rather less than average intelligence, and any point not quite clear even to them has been elucidated.

May the whole Path now be plain to all!

Frater Perdurabo is the most honest of all the great religious teachers. Others have said: "Believe me!" He says:"Don't believe me!" He does not ask for followers; would despise and refuse them. He wants an independent and self-reliant body of students to follow out their own methods of research. If he can save them time and trouble by giving a few useful "tips," his work will have been done to his own satisfaction.

Those who have wished men to believe in them were absurd. A persuasive tongue or pen, or an efficient sword, with rack and stake, produced this "belief," which is contrary to, and destructive of, all real religious experience.

The whole life of Frater Perdurabo is now devoted to seeing that you obtain this living experience of Truth for, by, and in yourselves!

SOROR VIRAKAM (Mary d'Este Sturges).
Book Four

by Frater Perdurabo and Soror Virakam
PART I

MEDITATION
THE WAY OF ATTAINMENT OF GENIUS OR GODHEAD CONSIDERED AS A DEVELOPMENT OF THE HUMAN BRAIN Issued by order of
the GREAT WHITE
BROTHERHOOD
known as the A.'.A.'.

Witness our Seal,
N.'.'
Praemonstrator-General
PRELIMINARY REMARKS
EXISTENCE, as we know it, is full of sorrow. To mention only one minor point: every man is a condemned criminal, only he does not know the date of his execution. This is unpleasant for every man. Consequently every man does everything possible to postpone the date, and would sacrifice anything that he has if he could reverse the sentence.

Practically all religions and all philosophies have started thus crudely, by promising their adherents some such reward as immortality.

No religion has failed hitherto by not promising enough; the present breaking up of all religions is due to the fact that people have asked to see the securities. Men have even renounced the important material advantages which a well-organized religion may confer upon a State, rather than acquiesce in fraud or falsehood, or even in any system which, if not proved guilty, is at least unable to demonstrate its innocence.

Being more or less bankrupt, the best thing that we can do is to attack the problem afresh without preconceived ideas. Let us begin by doubting every statement. Let us find a way of subjecting every statement to the test of experiment. Is there any truth at all in the claims of various religions? Let us examine the question.

Our original difficulty will be due to the enormous wealth of our material. To enter into a critical examination of all systems would be an unending task; the cloud of witnesses is too great. Now each religion is equally positive; and each demands faith. This we refuse in the absence of positive proof. But we may usefully inquire whether there is not any one thing upon which all religions have agreed: for, if so, it seems possible that it may be worthy of really thorough consideration.

It is certainly not to be found in dogma. Even so simple an idea as that of a supreme and eternal being is denied by a third of the human race. Legends of miracle are perhaps universal, but these, in the absence of demonstrative proof, are repugnant to common sense.

But what of the origin of religions? How is it that unproved assertion has so frequently compelled the assent of all classes of mankind? Is not this a miracle?

There is, however, one form of miracle which certainly happens, the influence of the genius. There is no known analogy in Nature. One cannot even think of a "super-dog" transforming the world of dogs, whereas in the history of mankind this happens with regularity and frequency. Now here are three "super-men," all at loggerheads. What is there in common between Christ, Buddha, and Mohammed? Is there any one point upon which all three are in accord?

No point of doctrine, no point of ethics, no theory of a "hereafter" do they share, and yet in the history of their lives we find one identity amid many diversities.

Buddha was born a Prince, and died a beggar.

Mohammed was born a beggar, and died a Prince.

Christ remained obscure until many years after his death.

Elaborate lives of each have been written by devotees, and there is one thing common to all three -- an omission. We hear nothing of Christ between the ages of twelve and thirty. Mohammed disappeared into a cave. Buddha left his palace, and went for a long while into the desert.

Each of them, perfectly silent up to the time of the disappearance, came back and immediately began to preach a new law.

This is so curious that it leaves us to inquire whether the histories of other great teachers contradict or confirm.

Moses led a quiet life until his slaying of the Egyptian. He then flees into the land of Midian, and we hear nothing of what he did there, yet immediately on his return he turns the whole place upside down. Later on, too, he absents himself on Mount Sinai for a few days, and comes back with the Tables of the Law in his hand.

St. Paul (again), after his adventure on the road to Damascus, goes into the desert of Arabia for many years, and on his return overturns the Roman Empire. Even in the legends of savages we find the same thing universal; somebody who is nobody in particular goes away for a longer or shorter period, and comes back as the "great medicine man"; but nobody ever knows exactly what happened to him.

Making every possible deduction for fable and myth, we get this one coincidence. A nobody goes away, and comes back a somebody. This is not to be explained in any of the ordinary ways.

There is not the smallest ground for the contention that these were from the start exceptional men. Mohammed would hardly have driven a camel until he was thirty-five years old if he had possessed any talent or ambition. St. Paul had much original talent; but he is the least of the five. Nor do they seem to have possessed any of the usual materials of power, such as rank, fortune, or influence.

Moses was rather a big man in Egypt when he left; he came back as a mere stranger.

Christ had not been to China and married the Emperor's daughter.

Mohammed had not been acquiring wealth and drilling soldiers.

Buddha had not been consolidating any religious organizations.

St. Paul had not been intriguing with an ambitious general.

Each came back poor; each came back alone.

What was the nature of their power? What happened to them in their absence?

History will not help us to solve the problem, for history is silent.

We have only the accounts given by the men themselves.

It would be very remarkable should we find that these accounts agree.

Of the great teachers we have mentioned Christ is silent; the other four tell us something; some more, some less.

Buddha goes into details too elaborate to enter upon in this place; but the gist of it is that in one way or another he got hold of the secret force of the World and mastered it.

Of St. Paul's experiences, we have nothing but a casual illusion to his having been "caught up into Heaven, and seen and heard things of which it was not lawful to speak."

Mohammed speaks crudely of his having been "visited by the Angel Gabriel," who communicated things from "God."

Moses says that he "beheld God."

Diverse as these statements are at first sight, all agree in announcing an experience of the class which fifty years ago would have been called supernatural, to-day may be called spiritual, and fifty years hence will have a proper name based on an understanding of the phenomenon which occurred.

Theorists have not been at a loss to explain; but they differ.

The Mohammedan insists that God is, and did really send Gabriel with messages for Mohammed: but all others contradict him. And from the nature of the case proof is impossible.

The lack of proof has been so severely felt by Christianity (and in a much less degree by Islam) that fresh miracles have been manufactured almost daily to support the tottering structure. Modern thought, rejecting these miracles, has adopted theories involving epilepsy and madness. As if organization could spring from disorganization! Even if epilepsy were the cause of these great movements which have caused civilization after civilization to arise from barbarism, it would merely form an argument for cultivating epilepsy.

Of course great men will never conform with the standards of little men, and he whose mission it is to overturn the world can hardly escape the title of revolutionary. The fads of a period always furnish terms of abuse. The fad of Caiaphas was Judaism, and the Pharisees told him that Christ "blasphemed." Pilate was a loyal Roman; to him they accused Christ of "sedition." When the Pope had all power it was necessary to prove an enemy a "heretic." Advancing to-day towards a medical oligarchy, we try to prove that our opponents are "insane," and (in a Puritan country) to attack their "morals." We should then avoid all rhetoric, and try to investigate with perfect freedom from bias the phenomena which occurred to these great leaders of mankind.

There is no difficulty in our assuming that these men themselves did not understand clearly what happened to them. The only one who explains his system thoroughly is Buddha, and Buddha is the only one that is not dogmatic. We may also suppose that the others thought it inadvisable to explain too clearly to their followers; St. Paul evidently took this line.

Our best document will therefore be the system of Buddha;

    footnote: We have the documents of Hinduism, and of two Chinese systems. But Hinduism has no single founder. Lao Tze is one of our best examples of a man who went away and had a mysterious experience; perhaps the best of all examples, as his system is the best of all systems. We have full details of his method of training in the Khang Kang King, and elsewhere. But it is so little known that we shall omit consideration of it in this popular account.

but it is so complex that no immediate summary will serve; and in the case of the others, if we have not the accounts of the Masters, we have those of their immediate followers.

The methods advised by all these people have a startling resemblance to one another. They recommend "virtue" (of various kinds), solitude, absence of excitement, moderation in diet, and finally a practice which some call prayer and some call meditation. (The former four may turn out on examination to be merely conditions favourable to the last.)

On investigating what is meant by these two things, we find that they are only one. For what is the state of either prayer or meditation? It is the restraining of the mind to a single act, state, or thought. If we sit down quietly and investigate the contents of our minds, we shall find that even at the best of times the principal characteristics are wandering and distraction. Any one who has had anything to do with children and untrained minds generally knows that fixity of attention is never present, even when there is a large amount of intelligence and good will.

If then we, with our well-trained minds, determine to control this wandering thought, we shall find that we are fairly well able to keep the thoughts running in a narrow channel, each thought linked to the last in a perfectly rational manner; but if we attempt to stop this current we shall find that, so far from succeeding, we shall merely bread down the banks of the channel. The mind will overflow, and instead of a chain of thought we shall have a chaos of confused images.

This mental activity is so great, and seems so natural, that it is hard to understand how any one first got the idea that it was a weakness and a nuisance. Perhaps it was because in the more natural practice of "devotion," people found that their thoughts interfered. In any case calm and self-control are to be preferred to restlessness. Darwin in his study presents a marked contrast with a monkey in a cage.

Generally speaking, the larger and stronger and more highly developed any animal is, the less does it move about, and such movements as it does make are slow and purposeful. Compare the ceaseless activity of bacteria with the reasoned steadiness of the beaver; and except in the few animal communities which are organized, such as bees, the greatest intelligence is shown by those of solitary habits. This is so true of man that psychologists have been obliged to treat of the mental state of crowds as if it were totally different in quality from any state possible to an individual.

It is by freeing the mind from external influences, whether casual or emotional, that it obtains power to see somewhat of the truth of things.

Let us, however, continue our practice. Let us determine to be masters of our minds. We shall then soon find what conditions are favourable.

There will be no need to persuade ourselves at great length that all external influences are likely to be unfavourable. New faces, new scenes will disturb us; even the new habits of life which we undertake for this very purpose of controlling the mind will at first tend to upset it. Still, we must give up our habit of eating too much, and follow the natural rule of only eating when we are hungry, listening to the interior voice which tells us that we have had enough.

The same rule applies to sleep. We have determined to control our minds, and so our time for meditation must take precedence of other hours.

We must fix times for practice, and make our feasts movable. In order to test our progress, for we shall find that (as in all physiological matters) meditation cannot be gauged by the feelings, we shall have a note-book and pencil, and we shall also have a watch. We shall then endeavour to count how often, during the first quarter of an hour, the mind breaks away from the idea upon which it is determined to concentrate. We shall practice this twice daily; and, as we go, experience will teach us which conditions are favourable and which are not. Before we have been doing this for very long we are almost certain to get impatient, and we shall find that we have to practice many other things in order to assist us in our work. New problems will constantly arise which must be faced, and solved.

For instance, we shall most assuredly find that we fidget. We shall discover that no position is comfortable, though we never noticed it before in all our lives!

This difficulty has been solved by a practice called "Asana," which will be described later on.

Memories of the events of the day will bother us; we must arrange our day so that it is absolutely uneventful. Our minds will recall to us our hopes and fears, our loves and hates, our ambitions, our envies, and many other emotions. All these must be cut off. We must have absolutely no interest in life but that of quieting our minds.

This is the object of the usual monastic vow of poverty, chastity, and obedience. If you have no property, you have no care, nothing to be anxious about; with chastity no other person to be anxious about, and to distract your attention; while if you are vowed to obedience the question of what you are to do no longer frets: you simply obey.

There are a great many other obstacles which you will discover as you go on, and it is proposed to deal with these in turn. But let us pass by for the moment to the point where you are nearing success.

In your early struggles you may have found it difficult to conquer sleep; and you may have wandered so far from the object of your meditations without noticing it, that the meditation has really been broken; but much later on, when you feel that you are "getting quite good," you will be shocked to find a complete oblivion of yourself and your surroundings. You will say: "Good heavens! I must have been to sleep!" or else "What on earth was I meditating upon?" or even "What was I doing?" "Where am I?" "Who am I?" or a mere wordless bewilderment may daze you. This may alarm you, and your alarm will not be lessened when you come to full consciousness, and reflect that you have actually forgotten who you are and what you are doing!

This is only one of many adventures that may come to you; but it is one of the most typical. By this time your hours of meditation will fill most of the day, and you will probably be constantly having presentiments that something is about to happen. You may also be terrified with the idea that your brain may be giving way; but you will have learnt the real symptoms of mental fatigue, and you will be careful to avoid them. They must be very carefully distinguished from idleness!

At certain times you will feel as if there were a contest between the will and the mind; at other times you may feel as if they were in harmony; but there is a third state, to be distinguished from the latter feeling. It is the certain sign of near success, the view-halloo. This is when the mind runs naturally towards the object chosen, not as if in obedience to the will of the owner of the mind, but as if directed by nothing at all, or by something impersonal; as if it were falling by its own weight, and not being pushed down.

Almost always, the moment that one becomes conscious of this, it stops; and the dreary old struggle between the cowboy will and the buckjumper mind begins again.

Like every other physiological process, consciousness of it implies disorder or disease.

In analysing the nature of this work of controlling the mind, the student will appreciate without trouble the fact that two things are involved -- the person seeing and the thing seen -- the person knowing and the thing known; and he will come to regard this as the necessary condition of all consciousness. We are too accustomed to assume to be facts things about which we have no real right even to guess. We assume, for example, that the unconscious is the torpid; and yet nothing is more certain than that bodily organs which are functioning well do so in silence. The best sleep is dreamless. Even in the case of games of skill our very best strokes are followed by the thought, "I don't know how I did it;" and we cannot repeat those strokes at will. The moment we begin to think consciously about a stroke we get "nervous," and are lost.

In fact, there are three main classes of stroke; the bad stroke, which we associate, and rightly, with wandering attention; the good stroke which we associate, and rightly, with fixed attention; and the perfect stroke, which we do not understand, but which is really caused by the habit of fixity of attention having become independent of the will, and thus enabled to act freely of its own accord.

This is the same phenomenon referred to above as being a good sign.

Finally something happens whose nature may form the subject of a further discussion later on. For the moment let it suffice to say that this consciousness of the Ego and the non-Ego, the seer and the thing seen, the knower and the thing known, is blotted out.

There is usually an intense light, an intense sound, and a feeling of such overwhelming bliss that the resources of language have been exhausted again and again in the attempt to describe it.

It is an absolute knock-out blow to the mind. It is so vivid and tremendous that those who experience it are in the gravest danger of losing all sense of proportion.

By its light all other events of life are as darkness. Owing to this, people have utterly failed to analyse it or to estimate it. They are accurate enough in saying that, compared with this, all human life is absolutely dross; but they go further, and go wrong. They argue that "since this is that which transcends the terrestrial, it must be celestial." One of the tendencies in their minds has been the hope of a heaven such as their parents and teachers have described, or such as they have themselves pictured; and, without the slightest grounds for saying so, they make the assumption "This is That."

In the Bhagavadgita a vision of this class is naturally attributed to the apparation of Vishnu, who was the local god of the period.

Anna Kingsford, who had dabbled in Hebrew mysticism, and was a feminist, got an almost identical vision; but called the "divine" figure which she saw alternately "Adonai" and "Maria."

Now this woman, though handicapped by a brain that was a mass of putrid pulp, and a complete lack of social status, education, and moral character, did more in the religious world than any other person had done for generations. She, and she alone, made Theosophy possible, and without Theosophy the world-wide interest in similar matters would never have been aroused. This interest is to the Law of Thelema what the preaching of John the Baptist was to Christianity.

We are now in a position to say what happened to Mohammed. Somehow or another his phenomenon happened in his mind. More ignorant than Anna Kingsford, though, fortunately, more moral, he connected it with the story of the "Annunciation," which he had undoubtedly heard in his boyhood, and said "Gabriel appeared to me." But in spite of his ignorance, his total misconception of the truth, the power of the vision was such that he was enabled to persist through the usual persecution, and founded a religion to which even to-day one man in every eight belongs.

The history of Christianity shows precisely the same remarkable fact. Jesus Christ was brought up on the fables of the "Old Testament," and so was compelled to ascribe his experiences to "Jehovah," although his gentle spirit could have had nothing in common with the monster who was always commanding the rape of virgins and the murder of little children, and whose rites were then, and still are, celebrated by human sacrifice.

    footnote: The massacres of Jews in Eastern Europe which surprise the ignorant, are almost invariably excited by the disappearance of "Christian" children, stolen, as the parents suppose, for the purposes of "ritual murder." WEH footnote: This unfortunate perpetuation of the "blood-libel" myth was later recanted by Crowley. The blood-libel was visited upon early Christians by the Romans and is visited today upon Thelemites by Christian Fundamentalists.

Similarly the visions of Joan of Arc were entirely Christian; but she, like all the others we have mentioned, found somewhere the force to do great things. Of course, it may be said that there is a fallacy in the argument; it may be true that all these great people "saw God," but it does not follow that every one who "sees God" will do great things.

This is true enough. In fact, the majority of people who claim to have "seen God," and who no doubt did "see God" just as much as those whom we have quoted, did nothing else.

But perhaps their silence is not a sign of their weakness, but of their strength. Perhaps these "great" men are the failures of humanity; perhaps it would be better to say nothing; perhaps only an unbalanced mind would wish to alter anything or believe in the possibility of altering anything; but there are those who think existence even in heaven intolerable so long as there is one single being who does not share that joy. There are some who may wish to travel back from the very threshold of the bridal chamber to assist belated guests.

Such at least was the attitude which Gotama Buddha adopted. Nor shall he be alone.

Again it may be pointed out that the contemplative life is generally opposed to the active life, and it must require an extremely careful balance to prevent the one absorbing the other.

As it will be seen later, the "vision of God," or "Union with God," or "Samadhi," or whatever we may agree to call it, has many kinds and many degrees, although there is an impassable abyss between the least of them and the greatest of all the phenomena of normal consciousness. "To sum up," we assert a secret source of energy which explains the phenomenon of Genius.

    footnote: We have dealt in this preliminary sketch only with examples of religious genius. Other kinds are subject to the same remarks, but the limits of our space forbid discussion of these.

We do not believe in any supernatural explanations, but insist that this source may be reached by the following out of definite rules, the degree of success depending upon the capacity of the seeker, and not upon the favour of any Divine Being. We assert that the critical phenomenon which determines success is an occurrence in the brain characterized essentially by the uniting of subject and object. We propose to discuss this phenomenon, analyse its nature, determine accurately the physical, mental and moral conditions which are favourable to it, to ascertain its cause, and thus to produce it in ourselves, so that we may adequately study its effects.
CHAPTER I
ASANA

THE problem before us may be stated thus simply. A man wishes to control his mind, to be able to think one chosen thought for as long as he will without interruption.

As previously remarked, the first difficulty arises from the body, which keeps on asserting its presence by causing its victim to itch, and in other ways to be distracted. He wants to stretch, scratch, sneeze. This nuisance is so persistent that the Hindus (in their scientific way) devised a special practice for quieting it.

The word Asana means "posture; but, as with all words which have caused debate, its exact meaning has altered, and it is used in several distinct senses by various authors. The greatest authority on "Yoga"

    footnote: Yoga is the general name for that form of meditation which aims at the uniting of subject and object, for "yog" is the root from which are derived the Latin word "Jugum" and the English word "Yoke."

is Patanjali. He says, "Asana is that which is firm and pleasant." This may be taken as meaning the result of success in the practice. Again, Sankhya says, "Posture is that which is steady and easy." And again, "any posture which is steady and easy is an Asana; there is no other rule." Any posture will do.

In a sense this is true, because any posture becomes uncomfortable sooner or later. The steadiness and easiness mark a definite attainment, as will be explained later on. Hindu books, such as the "Shiva Sanhita," give countless postures; many, perhaps most of them, impossible for the average adult European. Others insist that the head, neck, and spine should be kept vertical and straight, for reasons connected with the subject of Prana, which will be dealt with in its proper place. The positions illustrated in Liber E (Equinox I and VII) form the best guide.

    footnote: Here are four:

    1. Sit in a chair; head up, back straight, knees together, hands on knees, eyes closed. ("The God.")

    2. Kneel; buttocks resting on the heels, toes turned back, back and head straight, hands on thighs. ("The Dragon.")

    3. Stand; hold left ankle with right hand (and alternately practise right ankle in left hand, etc.), free forefinger on lips. ("The Ibis.")

    4. Sit; left heel pressing up anus, right foot poised on its toes, the heel covering the phallus; arms stretched out over the knees: head and back straight. ("The Thunderbolt.") 

The extreme of Asana is practised by those Yogis who remain in one position without moving, except in the case of absolute necessity, during their whole lives. One should not criticise such persons without a thorough knowledge of the subject. Such knowledge has not yet been published.

However, one may safely assert that since the great men previously mentioned did not do this, it will not be necessary for their followers. Let us then choose a suitable position, and consider what happens. There is a sort of happy medium between rigidity and limpness; the muscles are not to be strained; and yet they are not allowed to be altogether slack. It is difficult to find a good descriptive word. "Braced" is perhaps the best. A sense of physical alertness is desirable. Think of the tiger about to spring, or of the oarsman waiting for the gun. After a little there will be cramp and fatigue. The student must now set his teeth, and go through with it. The minor sensations of itching, etc., will be found to pass away, if they are resolutely neglected, but the cramp and fatigue may be expected to increase until the end of the practice. One may begin with half an hour or an hour. The student must not mind if the process of quitting the Asana involves several minutes of the acutest agony.

    WEH footnote: It is important to distinguish between cramp and severe chronic muscle spasm which can tear ligaments. Muscle spasm tends to result from pinching or compressing nerves, and can lead to permanent injury. Also beware of constricted circulation, which produces numbness more than it does pain. Wear loose clothing and avoid pressing on hard objects.

It will require a good deal of determination to persist day after day, for in most cases it will be found that the discomfort and pain, instead of diminishing, tend to increase.

On the other hand, if the student pay no attention, fail to watch the body, an opposite phenomenon may occur. He shifts to ease himself without knowing that he has done so. To avoid this, choose a position which naturally is rather cramped and awkward, and in which slight changes are not sufficient to bring ease. Otherwise, for the first few days, the student may even imagine that he has conquered the position. In fact, in all these practices their apparent simplicity is such that the beginner is likely to wonder what all the fuss is about, perhaps to think that he is specially gifted. Similarly a man who has never touched a golf club will take his umbrella and carelessly hole a putt which would frighten the best putter alive.

In a few days, however, in all cases, the discomforts will begin. As you go on, they will begin earlier in the course of the hour's exercise. The disinclination to practise at all may become almost unconquerable. One must warn the student against imagining that some other position would be easier to master than the one he has selected. Once you begin to change about you are lost.

Perhaps the reward is not so far distant: it will happen one day that the pain is suddenly forgotten, the fact of the presence of the body is forgotten, and one will realize that during the whole of one's previous life the body was always on the borderland of consciousness, and that consciousness a consciousness of pain; and at this moment one will further realize with an indescribable feeling of relief that not only is this position, which has been so painful, the very ideal of physical comfort, but that all other conceivable positions of the body are uncomfortable. This feeling represents success.

There will be no further difficulty in the practice. One will get into one's Asana with almost the same feeling as that with which a tired man gets into a hot bath; and while he is in that position, the body may be trusted to send him no message that might disturb his mind.

Other results of this practice are described by Hindu authors, but they do not concern us at present. Our first obstacle has been removed, and we can continue with the others.
CHAPTER II
PRANAYAMA AND ITS PARALLEL IN SPEECH, MANTRAYOGA

THE connection between breath and mind will be fully discussed in speaking of the Magick Sword, but it may be useful to premise a few details of a practical character. You may consult various Hindu manuals, and the writing of Kwang Tze, for various notable theories as to method and result.

But in this sceptical system one had better content one's self with statements which are not worth the trouble of doubting.

The ultimate idea of meditation being to still the mind, it may be considered a useful preliminary to still consciousness of all the functions of the body. This has been dealt with in the chapter on Asana. One may, however, mention that some Yogis carry it to the point of trying to stop the beating of the heart. Whether this be desirable or no it would be useless to the beginner, so he will endeavour to make the breathing very slow and very regular. The rules for this practice are given in Liber CCVI.

The best way to time the breathing, once some little skill has been acquired, with a watch to bear witness, is by the use of a mantra. The mantra acts on the thoughts very much as Pranayama does upon the breath. The thought is bound down to a recurring cycle; any intruding thoughts are thrown off by the mantra, just as pieces of putty would be from a fly-wheel; and the swifter the wheel the more difficult would it be for anything to stick.

This is the proper way to practise a mantra. Utter it as loudly and slowly as possible ten times, then not quite so loudly and a very little faster ten times more. Continue this process until there is nothing but a rapid movement of the lips; this movement should be continued with increased velocity and diminishing intensity until the mental muttering completely absorbs the physical. The student is by this time absolutely still, with the mantra racing in his brain; he should, however, continue to speed it up until he reaches his limit, at which he should continue for as long as possible, and then cease the practice by reversing the process above described.

Any sentence may be used as a mantra, and possibly the Hindus are correct in thinking that there is a particular sentence best suited to any particular man. Some men might find the liquid mantras of the Quran slide too easily, so that it would be possible to continue another train of thought without disturbing the mantra; one is supposed while saying the mantra to meditate upon its meaning. This suggests that the student might construct for himself a mantra which should represent the Universe in sound, as the pantacle

    footnote: See Part II.

should do in form. Occasionally a mantra may be "given," "i.e.," heard in some unexplained manner during a meditation. One man, for example, used the words: "And strive to see in everything the will of God;" to another, while engaged in killing thoughts, came the words "and push it down," apparently referring to the action of the inhibitory centres which he was using. By keeping on with this he got his "result."

The ideal mantra should be rhythmical, one might even say musical; but there should be sufficient emphasis on some syllable to assist the faculty of attention. The best mantras are of medium length, so far as the beginner is concerned. If the mantra is too long, one is apt to forget it, unless one practises very hard for a great length of time. On the other hand, mantras of a single syllable, such as "Aum,"

    footnote: However, in saying a mantra containing the word "Aum," one sometimes forgets the other words, and remains concentrated, repeating the "Aum" at intervals; but this is the result of a practice already begun, not the beginning of a practice.

are rather jerky; the rhythmical idea is lost. Here are a few useful mantras:

1. Aum.

2. Aum Tat Sat Aum. This mantra is purely spondaic.

II.

{illustration: line of music with: Aum Tat Sat Aum :under it}

3. Aum mani padme hum; two trochees between two caesuras.

III.

{illustration: line of music with: Aum Ma-ni Pad-me Hum :under it}

4. Aum shivaya vashi; three trochees. Note that "shi" means rest, the absolute or male aspect of the Deity; "va" is energy, the manifested or female side of the Deity. This Mantra therefore expresses the whole course of the Universe, from Zero through the finite back to Zero.

IV.

{illustration: line of music with: Aum shi-va-ya Va-shi Aum shi-va-ya Vashi :under it}

5. Allah. The syllables of this are accented equally, with a certain pause between them; and are usually combined by fakirs with a rhythmical motion of the body to and fro.

6. Hua allahu alazi lailaha illa Hua.

Here are some longer ones:

7. The famous Gayatri.

Aum! tat savitur varenyam
Bhargo devasya dimahi
Dhiyo yo na pratyodayat.

Scan this as trochaic tetrameters.

8. Qol: Hua Allahu achad; Allahu Assamad; lam yalid walam yulad; walam yakun lahu kufwan achad.

9. This mantra is the holiest of all that are or can be. It is from the Stele of Revealing.

    footnote: See Equinox VII.

A ka dua
Tuf ur biu
Bi aa chefu
IX. Dudu ner af an nuteru.

{illustration: two lines of music with: A ka du - a Tuf ur bi - u Bi A'a che - fu Du - du ner af an nu - te -ru :under them}

Such are enough for selection.

    footnote: Meanings of mantras:

    1 Aum is the sound produced by breathing forcibly from the back of the throat and gradually closing the mouth. The three sounds represent the creative, preservative, and destructive principles. There are many more points about this, enough to fill a volume.

    2. O that Existent! O! -- An aspiration after realty, truth.

    3. O the Jewel in the Lotus! Amen! -- Refers to Buddha and Harpocrates; but also the symbolism of the Rosy Cross.

    4. Gives the cycle of creation. Peace manifesting as Power, Power dissolving in Peace.

    5. God. It adds to 66, the sum of the first 11 numbers.

    6. He is God, and there is no other God than He.

    7. O! let us strictly meditate on the adorable light of that divine Savitri (the interior Sun, etc.). May she enlighten our minds!

    8. Say:
    He is God alone!
    God the Eternal!
    He begets not and is not begotten!
    Nor is there like unto Him any one!

    9. Unity uttermost showed!
    I adore the might of Thy breath,
    Supreme and terrible God,
    Who makest the Gods and Death
    To tremble before Thee: --
    I, I adore Thee! 

There are many other mantras. Sri Sabapaty Swami gives a particular one for each of the Cakkras. But let the student select one mantra and master it thoroughly.

You have not even begun to master a mantra until it continues unbroken through sleep. This is much easier than it sounds.

Some schools advocate practising a mantra with the aid of instrumental music and dancing. Certainly very remarkable effects are obtained in the way of "magic" powers; whether great spiritual results are equally common is a doubtful point. Persons wishing to study them may remember that the Sahara desert is within three days of London; and no doubt the Sidi Aissawa would be glad to accept pupils. This discussion of the parallel science of mantra-yoga has led us far indeed from the subject of Pranayama.

Pranayama is notably useful in quieting the emotions and appetites; and, whether by reason of the mechanical pressure which it asserts, or by the thorough combustion which it assures in the lungs, it seems to be admirable from the standpoint of health. Digestive troubles in particular are very easy to remove in this way. It purifies both the body and the lower functions of the mind,

    footnote: Emphatically. Emphatically. Emphatically. It is impossible to combine Pranayama properly performed with emotional thought. It should be resorted to immediately, at all times during life, when calm is threatened.

    On the whole, the ambulatory practices are more generally useful to the health than the sedentary; for in this way walking and fresh air are assured. But some of the sedentary practice should be done, and combined with meditation. Of course when actually "racing" to get results, walking is a distraction. 

and should be practised certainly never less than one hour daily by the serious student.

Four hours is a better period, a golden mean; sixteen hours is too much for most people.
CHAPTER III
YAMA

    footnote: Yama means literally "control." It is dealt with in detail in Part II, "The Wand."

AND NIYAMA
THE Hindus have place these two attainments in the forefront of their programme. They are the "moral qualities" and "good works" which are supposed to predispose to mental calm.

"Yama" consists of non-killing, truthfulness, non-stealing, continence, and non-receiving of any gift.

In the Buddhist system, "Sila", "Virtue," is similarly enjoined. The qualities are, for the layman, these five: Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not lie. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt drink no intoxicating drink. For the monk many others are added.

The commandments of Moses are familiar to all; they are rather similar; and so are those given by Christ

    footnote: Not, however, original. The whole sermon is to be found in the Talmud.

in the "Sermon on the Mount."

Some of these are only the "virtues" of a slave, invented by his master to keep him in order. The real point of the Hindu "Yama" is that breaking any of these would tend to excite the mind.

Subsequent theologians have tried to improve upon the teachings of the Masters, have given a sort of mystical importance to these virtues; they have insisted upon them for their own sake, and turned them into puritanism and formalism. Thus "non-killing," which originally meant "do not excite yourself by stalking tigers," has been interpreted to mean that it is a crime to drink water that has not been strained, lest you should kill the animalcula.

But this constant worry, this fear of killing anything by mischance is, on the whole, worse than a hand-to-hand conflict with a griesly bear. If the barking of a dog disturbs your meditation, it is simplest to shoot the dog, and think no more about it.

A similar difficulty with wives has caused some masters to recommend celibacy. In all these questions common sense must be the guide. No fixed rule can be laid down. The "non-receiving of gifts," for instance, is rather important for a Hindu, who would be thoroughly upset for weeks if any one gave him a coconut: but the average European takes things as they come by the time that he has been put into long trousers.

The only difficult question is that of continence, which is complicated by many considerations, such as that of energy; but everybody's mind is hopelessly muddled on this subject, which some people confuse with erotology, and others with sociology. There will be no clear thinking on this matter until it is understood as being solely a branch of athletics.

We may then dismiss Yama and Niyama with this advice: let the student decide for himself what form of life, what moral code, will least tend to excite his mind; but once he has formulated it, let him stick to it, avoiding opportunism; and let him be very careful to take no credit for what he does or refrains from doing -- it is a purely practical code, of no value in itself.

The cleanliness which assists the surgeon in his work would prevent the engineer from doing his at all.

(Ethical questions are adequately dealt with in "Then Tao" in "Konx Om Pax," and should be there studied. Also see Liber XXX of the A. A. Also in Liber CCXX, the "Book of the Law," it is said: "DO WHAT THOU WILT shall be the whole of the Law."

    WEH FOOTNOTE: SIC, should be: "Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law."

Remember that for the purpose of this treatise the whole object of Yama and Niyama is to live so that no emotion or passion disturbs the mind.)
CHAPTER IV
PRATYAHARA

PRATYAHARA is the first process in the mental part of our task. The previous practices, Asana, Pranayama, Yama, and Niyama, are all acts of the body, while mantra is connected with speech: Pratyahara is purely mental.

And what is Pratyahara? This word is used by different authors in different senses. The same word is employed to designate both the practice and the result. It means for our present purpose a process rather strategical than practical; it is introspection, a sort of general examination of the contents of the mind which we wish to control: Asana having been mastered, all immediate exciting causes have been removed, and we are free to think what we are thinking about.

A very similar experience to that of Asana is in store for us. At first we shall very likely flatter ourselves that our minds are pretty calm; this is a defect of observation. Just as the European standing for the first time on the edge of the desert will see nothing there, while his Arab can tell him the family history of each of the fifty persons in view, because he has learnt how to look, so with practice the thoughts will become more numerous and more insistent.

As soon as the body was accurately observed it was found to be terribly restless and painful; now that we observe the mind it is seen to be more restless and painful still. (See diagram opposite.)

A similar curve might be plotted for the real and apparent painfulness of Asana.

Conscious of this fact, we begin to try to control it: "Not quite so many thoughts, please!" "Don't think quite so fast, please!" "No more of that kind of thought, please!" It is only then that we discover that what we thought was a school of playful porpoises is really the convolutions of the sea-serpent. The attempt to repress has the effect of exciting.

When the unsuspecting pupil first approaches his holy but wily Guru, and demands magical powers, that Wise One replies that he will confer them, points out with much caution and secrecy some particular spot on the pupil's body which has never previously attracted his attention, and says: "In order to obtain this magical power which you seek, all that is necessary is to wash seven times in the Ganges during seven days, being particularly careful to avoid thinking of that one spot." Of

    {diagram on page 26, nothing else, graph with following text beneath:

    BD shows the Control of the Mind, improving slowly at first, afterwards more quickly. It starts from at or near zero, and should reach absolute control at D.

    EF shows the Power of Observation of the contents of the mind, improving quickly at first, afterwards more slowly, up to perfection at F. It starts well above zero in the case of most educated men.

    The height of the perpendiculars HI indicates the dissatisfaction of the student with his power of control. Increasing at first, it ultimately diminishes to zero.} 

course the unhappy youth spends a disgusted week in thinking of little else.

It is positively amazing with what persistence a thought, even a whole train of thoughts, returns again and again to the charge. It becomes a positive nightmare. It is intensely annoying, too, to find that one does not become conscious that one has got on to the forbidden subject until one has gone right through with it. However, one continues day after day investigating thoughts and trying to check them; and sooner or later one proceeds to the next stage, Dharana, the attempt to restrain the mind to a single object.

Before we go on to this, however, we must consider what is meant by success in Pratyahara. This is a very extensive subject, and different authors take widely divergent views. One writer means an analysis so acute that every thought is resolved into a number of elements (see "The Psychology of Hashish," Section V, in Equinox II).

Others take the view that success in the practice is something like the experience which Sir Humphrey Davy had as a result of taking nitrous oxide, in which he exclaimed: "The universe is composed exclusively of ideas."

Others say that it gives Hamlet's feeling: "There's nothing good or bad but thinking makes it so," interpreted as literally as was done by Mrs. Eddy.

However, the main point is to acquire some sort of inhibitory power over the thoughts. Fortunately there is an unfailing method of acquiring this power. It is given in Liber III. If Sections 1 and 2 are practised (if necessary with the assistance of another person to aid your vigilance) you will soon be able to master the final section.

In some people this inhibitory power may flower suddenly in very much the same way as occurred with Asana. Quite without any relaxation of vigilance, the mind will suddenly be stilled. There will be a marvellous feeling of peace and rest, quite different from the lethargic feeling which is produced by over-eating. It is difficult to say whether so definite a result would come to all, or even to most people. The matter is one of no very great importance. If you have acquired the power of checking the rise of thought you may proceed to the next stage.
CHAPTER V
DHARANA

NOW that we have learnt to observe the mind, so that we know how it works to some extent, and have begun to understand the elements of control, we may try the result of gathering together all the powers of the mind, and attempting to focus them on a single point.

We know that it is fairly easy for the ordinary educated mind to think without much distraction on a subject in which it is much interested. We have the popular phrase, "revolving a thing in the mind"; and as long as the subject is sufficiently complex, as long as thoughts pass freely, there is no great difficulty. So long as a gyroscope is in motion, it remains motionless relatively to its support, and even resists attempts to distract it; when it stops it falls from that position. If the earth ceased to spin round the sun, it would at once fall into the sun.

The moment then that the student takes a simple subject -- or rather a simple object -- and imagines it or visualizes it, he will find that it is not so much his creature as he supposed. Other thoughts will invade the mind, so that the object is altogether forgotten, perhaps for whole minutes at a time; and at other times the object itself will begin to play all sorts of tricks.

Suppose you have chosen a white cross. It will move its bar up and down, elongate the bar, turn the bar oblique, get its arms unequal, turn upside down, grow branches, get a crack around it or a figure upon it, change its shape altogether like an Amoeba, change its size and distance as a whole, change the degree of its illumination, and at the same time change its colour. It will get splotchy and blotchy, grow patterns, rise, fall, twist and turn; clouds will pass over its face. There is no conceivable change of which it is incapable. Not to mention its total disappearance, and replacement by something altogether different!

Any one to whom this experience does not occur need not imagine that he is meditating. It shows merely that he is incapable of concentrating his mind in the very smallest degree. Perhaps a student may go for several days before discovering that he is not meditating. When he does, the obstinacy of the object will infuriate him; and it is only now that his real troubles will begin, only now that Will comes really into play, only now that his manhood is tested. If it were not for the Will-development which he got in the conquest of Asana, he would probably give up. As it is, the mere physical agony which he underwent is the veriest trifle compared with the horrible tedium of Dharana.

For the first week it may seem rather amusing, and you may even imagine you are progressing; but as the practice teaches you what you are doing, you will apparently get worse and worse.

Please understand that in doing this practice you are supposed to be seated in Asana, and to have note-book and pencil by your side, and a watch in front of you. You are not to practise at first for more than ten minutes at a time, so as to avoid risk of overtiring the brain. In fact you will probably find that the whole of your will-power is not equal to keeping to a subject at all for so long as three minutes, or even apparently concentrating on it for so long as three seconds, or three-fifths of one second. By "keeping to it at all" is meant the mere attempt to keep to it. The mind becomes so fatigued, and the object so incredibly loathsome, that it is useless to continue for the time being. In Frater P.'s record we find that after daily practice for six months, meditations of four minutes and less are still being recorded.

The student is supposed to count the number of times that his thought wanders; this he can do on his fingers or on a string of beads.

    footnote: This counting can easily become quite mechanical. With the thought that reminds you of a break associate the notion of counting.

    The grosser kind of break can be detected by another person. It is accompanied with a flickering of the eyelid, and can be seen by him. With practice he could detect even very small breaks. 

If these breaks seem to become more frequent instead of less frequent, the student must not be discourage; this is partially caused by his increased accuracy of observation. In exactly the same way, the introduction of vaccination resulted in an apparent increase in the number of cases of smallpox, the reason being that people began to tell the truth about the disease instead of faking.

Soon, however, the control will improve faster than the observation. When this occurs the improvement will become apparent in the record. Any variation will probably be due to accidental circumstances; for example, one night your may be very tired when you start; another night you may have headache or indigestion. You will do well to avoid practising at such times.

We will suppose, then, that you have reached the stage when your average practice on one subject is about half an hour, and the average number of breaks between ten and twenty. One would suppose that this implied that during the periods between the breaks one was really concentrated, but this is not the case. The mind is flickering, although imperceptibly. However, there may be sufficient real steadiness even at this early stage to cause some very striking phenomena, of which the most marked is one which will possibly make you think that you have gone to sleep. Or, it may seem quite inexplicable, and in any case will disgust you with yourself. You will completely forget who you are, what you are, and what you are doing. A similar phenomenon sometimes happens when one is half awake in the morning, and one cannot think what town one is living in. The similarity of these two things is rather significant. It suggests that what is really happening is that you are waking up from the sleep which men call waking, the sleep whose dreams are life.

There is another way to test one's progress in this practice, and that is by the character of the breaks.

"Breaks" are classed as follows:

Firstly, physical sensations. These should have been overcome by Asana.

Secondly, breaks that seem to be dictated by events immediately preceding the meditation. Their activity becomes tremendous. Only by this practice does one understand how much is really observed by the sense without the mind becoming conscious of it.

Thirdly, there is a class of breaks partaking of the nature of reverie or "day-dreams." These are very insidious -- one may go on for a long time without realizing that one has wandered at all.

Fourthly, we get a very high class of break, which is a sort of aberration of the control itself. You think, "How well I am doing it!" or perhaps that it would be rather a good idea if you were on a desert island, or if you were in a sound-proof house, or if you were sitting by a waterfall. But these are only trifling variations from the vigilance itself.

A fifth class of breaks seems to have no discoverable source in the mind. Such may even take the form of actual hallucination, usually auditory. Of course, such hallucinations are infrequent, and are recognized for what they are; otherwise the student had better see his doctor. The usual kind consists of odd sentences or fragments of sentences, which are heard quite distinctly in a recognizable human voice, not the student's own voice, or that of any one he knows. A similar phenomenon is observed by wireless operators, who call such messages "atmospherics."

There is a further kind of break, which is the desired result itself. It must be dealt with later in detail.

Now there is a real sequence in these classes of breaks. As control improves, the percentage of primaries and secondaries will diminish, even though the total number of breaks in a meditation remain stationary. By the time that you are meditating two or three hours a day, and filing up most of the rest of the day with other practices designed to assist, when nearly every time something or other happens, and there is constantly a feeling of being "on the brink of something pretty big," one may expect to proceed to the next state -- Dhyana.
CHAPTER VI
DHYANA

THIS word has two quite distinct and mutually exclusive meanings. The first refers to the result itself. Dhyana is the same word as the Pali "Jhana." The Buddha counted eight Jhanas, which are evidently different degrees and kinds of trance. The Hindu also speaks of Dhyana as a lesser form of Samadhi. Others, however, treat it as if it were merely an intensification of Dharana. Patanjali says: "Dhrana is holding the mind on to some particular object. An unbroken flow of knowledge in that subject is Dhyana. When that, giving up all forms, reflects only the meaning, it is Samadhi." He combines these three into Samyama.

We shall treat of Dhyana as a result rather than as a method. Up to this point ancient authorities have been fairly reliable guides, except with regard to their crabbed ethics; but when they get on the subject of results of meditation, they completely lose their heads.

They exhaust the possibilities of poetry to declare what is demonstrably untrue. For example, we find in the Shiva Sanhita that "he who daily contemplates on this lotus of the heart is eagerly desired by the daughters of Gods, has clairaudience, clairvoyance, and can walk in the air." Another person "can make gold, discover medicine for disease, and see hidden treasures." All this is filth. What is the curse upon religion that its tenets must always be associated with every kind of extravagance and falsehood?

There is one exception; it is the A.'.A.'., whose members are extremely careful to make no statement at all that cannot be verified in the usual manner; or where this is not easy, at least avoid anything like a dogmatic statement. In Their second book of practical instruction, Liber O, occur these words:

"By doing certain things certain results will follow. Students are most earnestly warned against attributing objective reality or philosophical validity to any of them."

Those golden words!

In discussing Dhyana, then, let it be clearly understood that something unexpected is about to be described.

We shall consider its nature and estimate its value in a perfectly unbiassed way, without allowing ourselves the usual rhapsodies, or deducing any theory of the universe. One extra fact may destroy some existing theory; that is common enough. But no single fact is sufficient to construct one.

It will have been understood that Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi form a continuous process, and exactly when the climax comes does not matter. It is of this climax that we must speak, for this is a matter of "experience," and a very striking one.

In the course of our concentration we noticed that the contents of the mind at any moment consisted of two things, and no more: the Object, variable, and the Subject, invariable, or apparently so. By success in Dharana the object has been made as invariable as the subject.

Now the result of this is that the two become one. This phenomenon usually comes as a tremendous shock. It is indescribable even by the masters of language; and it is therefore not surprising that semi-educated stutterers wallow in oceans of gush.

All the poetic faculties and all the emotional faculties are thrown into a sort of ecstasy by an occurrence which overthrows the mind, and makes the rest of life seem absolutely worthless in comparison.

Good literature is principally a matter of clear observation and good judgment expressed in the simplest way. For this reason none of the great events of history (such as earthquakes and battles) have been well described by eye-witnesses, unless those eye-witnesses were out of danger. But even when one has become accustomed to Dhyana by constant repetition, no words seem adequate.

One of the simplest forms of Dhyana may be called "the Sun." The sun is seen (as it were) by itself, not by an observer; and although the physical eye cannot behold the sun, one is compelled to make the statement that this "Sun" is far more brilliant than the sun of nature. The whole thing takes place on a higher level.

Also the conditions of thought, time, and space are abolished. It is impossible to explain what this really means: only experience can furnish you with apprehension.

(This, too, has its analogies in ordinary life; the conceptions of higher mathematics cannot be grasped by the beginner, cannot be explained to the layman.)

A further development is the appearance of the Form which has been universally described as human; although the persons describing it proceed to add a great number of details which are not human at all. This particular appearance is usually assumed to be "God."

But, whatever it may be, the result on the mind of the student is tremendous; all his thoughts are pushed to their greatest development. He sincerely believes that they have the divine sanction; perhaps he even supposes that they emanate from this "God." He goes back into the world armed with this intense conviction and authority. He proclaims his ideas without the restraint which is imposed upon most persons by doubt, modesty, and diffidence;

    footnote: This lack of restraint is not to be confused with that observed in intoxication and madness. Yet there is a very striking similarity, though only a superficial one.

while further there is, one may suppose, a real clarification.

In any case, the mass of mankind is always ready to be swayed by anything thus authoritative and distinct. History is full of stories of officers who have walked unarmed up to a mutinous regiment, and disarmed them by the mere force of confidence. The power of the orator over the mob is well known. It is, probably, for this reason that the prophet has been able to constrain mankind to obey his law. I never occurs to him that any one can do otherwise. In practical life one can walk past any guardian, such as a sentry or ticket-collector, if one can really act so that the man is somehow persuaded that you have a right to pass unchallenged.

This power, by the way, is what has been described by magicians as the power of invisibility. Somebody or other has an excellent story of four quite reliable men who were on the look-out for a murderer, and had instructions to let no one pass, and who all swore subsequently in presence of the dead body that no one had passed. None of them had seen the postman.

The thieves who stole the "Gioconda" from the Louvre were probably disguised as workmen, and stole the picture under the very eye of the guardian; very likely got him to help them.

It is only necessary to believe that a thing must be to bring it about. This belief must not be an emotional or an intellectual one. It resides in a deeper portion of the mind, yet a portion not so deep but that most men, probably all successful men, will understand these words, having experience of their own with which they can compare it.

The most important factor in Dhyana is, however, the annihilation of the Ego. Our conception of the universe must be completely overturned if we are to admit this as valid; and it is time that we considered what is really happening.

It will be conceded that we have given a very rational explanation of the greatness of great men. They had an experience so overwhelming, so out of proportion to the rest of things, that they were freed from all the petty hindrances which prevent the normal man from carrying out his projects.

Worrying about clothes, food, money, what people may think, how and why, and above all the fear of consequences, clog nearly every one. Nothing is easier, theoretically, than for an anarchist to kill a king. He has only to buy a rifle, make himself a first-class shot, and shoot the king from a quarter of a mile away. And yet, although there are plenty of anarchists, outrages are very few. At the same time, the police would probably be the first to admit that if any man were really tired of life, in his deepest being, a state very different from that in which a man goes about saying he is tired of life, he could manage somehow or other to kill someone first.

Now the man who has experienced any of the more intense forms of Dhyana is thus liberated. The Universe is thus destroyed for him, and he for it. His will can therefore go on its way unhampered. One may imagine that in the case of Mohammed he had cherished for years a tremendous ambition, and never done anything because those qualities which were subsequently manifested as statesmanship warned him that he was impotent. His vision in the cave gave him that confidence which was required, the faith that moves mountains. There are a lot of solid-seeming things in this world which a child could push over; but not one has the courage to push.

Let us accept provisionally this explanation of greatness, and pass it by. Ambition has led us to this point; but we are now interested in the work for its own sake.

A most astounding phenomenon has happened to us; we have had an experience which makes Love, fame, rank, ambition, wealth, look like thirty cents; and we begin to wonder passionately, "What is truth?" The Universe has tumbled about our ears like a house of cards, and we have tumbled too. Yet this ruin is like the opening of the Gates of Heaven! Here is a tremendous problem, and there is something within us which ravins for its solution.

Let us see what what explanation we can find.

The first suggestion which would enter a well-balanced mind, versed in the study of nature, is that we have experienced a mental catastrophe. Just as a blow on the head will made a man "see stars," so one might suppose that the terrific mental strain of Dharana has somehow over-excited the brain, and caused a spasm, or possibly even the breaking of a small vessel. There seems no reason to reject this explanation altogether, though it would be quite absurd to suppose that to accept it would be to condemn the practice. Spasm is a normal function of at least one of the organs of the body. That the brain is not damaged by the practice is proved by the fact that many people who claim to have had this experience repeatedly continue to exercise the ordinary avocations of life without diminished activity.

We may dismiss, then the physiological question. It throws no light on the main problem, which is the value of the testimony of the experience.

Now this is a very difficult question, and raises the much larger question as to the value of any testimony. Every possible thought has been doubted at some time or another, except the thought which can only be expressed by a note of interrogation, since to doubt that thought asserts it. (For a full discussion see "The Soldier and the Hunchback," "Equinox," I.) But apart from this deep-seated philosophic doubt there is the practical doubt of every day. The popular phrase, "to doubt the evidence of one's senses," shows us that that evidence is normally accepted; but a man of science does nothing of the sort. He is so well aware that his senses constantly deceive him, that he invents elaborate instruments to correct them. And he is further aware that the Universe which he can directly perceive through sense, is the minutest fraction of the Universe which he knows indirectly.

For example, four-fifths of the air is composed of nitrogen. If anyone were to bring a bottle of nitrogen into this room it would be exceedingly difficult to say what it was; nearly all the tests that one could apply to it would be negative. His senses tell him little or nothing.

Argon was only discovered at all by comparing the weight of chemically pure nitrogen with that of the nitrogen of the air. This had often been done, but no one had sufficiently fine instruments even to perceive the discrepancy. To take another example, a famous man of science asserted not so long ago that science could never discover the chemical composition of the fixed stars. Yet this has been done, and with certainty.

If you were to ask your man of science for his "theory of the real," he would tell you that the "ether," which cannot be perceived in any way by any of the senses, or detected by any instruments, and which possesses qualities which are, to use ordinary language, impossible, is very much more real than the chair he is sitting on. The chair is only one fact; and its existence is testified by one very fallible person. The ether is the necessary deduction from millions of facts, which have been verified again and again and checked by every possible test of truth. There is therefore no "a priori" reason for rejecting anything on the ground that it is not directly perceived by the senses.

To turn to another point. One of our tests of truth is the vividness of the impression. An isolated event in the past of no great importance may be forgotten; and if it be in some way recalled, one may find one's self asking: "Did I dream it? or did it really happen?" What can never be forgotten is the "catastrophic". The first death among the people that one loves (for example) would never be forgotten; for the first time one would "realize" what one had previously merely "known". Such an experience sometimes drives people insane. Men of science have been known to commit suicide when their pet theory has been shattered. This problem has been discussed freely in "Science and Buddhism,"

    footnote: See Crowley, "Collected Works."

"Time," "The Camel," and other papers. This much only need we say in this place that Dhyana has to be classed as the most vivid and catastrophic of all experiences. This will be confirmed by any one who has been there.

It is, then, difficult to overrate the value that such an experience has for the individual, especially as it is his entire conception of things, including his most deep-seated conception, the standard to which he has always referred everything, his own self, that is overthrown; and when we try to explain it away as hallucination, temporary suspension of the faculties or something similar, we find ourselves unable to do so. You cannot argue with a flash of lightning that has knocked you down.

Any mere theory is easy to upset. One can find flaws in the reasoning process, one can assume that the premisses are in some way false; but in this case, if one attacks the evidence for Dhyana, the mind is staggered by the fact that all other experience, attacked on the same lines, will fall much more easily.

In whatever way we examine it the result will always be the same. Dhyana may be false; but, if so, so is everything else.

Now the mind refuses to rest in a belief of the unreality of its own experiences. It may not be what is seems; but it must be something, and if (on the whole) ordinary life is something, how much more must that be by whose light ordinary life seems nothing!

The ordinary man sees the falsity and disconnectedness and purposelessness of dreams; he ascribes them (rightly) to a disordered mind. The philosopher looks upon waking life with similar contempt; and the person who has experienced Dhyana takes the same view, but not by mere pale intellectual conviction. Reasons, however cogent, never convince utterly; but this man in Dhyana has the same commonplace certainty that a man has on waking from a nightmare. "I wasn't falling down a thousand flights of stairs, it was only a bad dream."

Similarly comes the reflection of the man who has had experience of Dhyana: "I am not that wretched insect, that imperceptible parasite of earth; it was only a bad dream." And as you could not convince the normal man that his nightmare was more real than his awakening, so you cannot convince the other that his Dhyana was hallucination, even though he is only too well aware that he has fallen from that state into "normal" life.

It is probably rare for a single experience to upset thus radically the whole conception of the Universe, just as sometimes, in the first moments of waking, there remains a half-doubt as to whether dream or waking is real. But as one gains further experience, when Dhyana is no longer a shock, when the student has had plenty of time to make himself at home in the new world, this conviction will become absolute.

    Footnote: It should be remembered that at present there are no data for determining the duration of Dhyana. One can only say that, since it certainly occured between such and such hours, it must have lasted less than that time. Thus we see, from Frater P.'s record, that it can certianly occur in less than an hour and five minutes.

Another rationalist consideration is this. The student has not been trying to excite the mind but to calm it, not to produce any one thought but to exclude all thoughts; for there is no connection between the object of meditation and the Dhyana. Why must we suppose a breaking down of the whole process, especially as the mind bears no subsequent traces of any interference, such as pain or fatigue? Surely this once, if never again, the Hindu image expresses the simplest theory!

That image is that of a lake into which five glaciers move. These glaciers are the senses. While ice (the impressions) is breaking off constantly into the lake, the waters are troubled. If the glaciers are stopped the surface becomes calm; and then, and only then, can it reflect unbroken the disk of the sum. This sun is the "soul" or "God."

We should, however, avoid these terms for the present, on account of their implications. Let us rather speak of this sun as "some unknown thing whose presence has been masked by all things known, and by the knower."

It is probable, too, that our memory of Dhyana is not of the phenomenon itself, but of the image left thereby on the mind. But this is true of all phenomena, as Berkeley and Kant have proved beyond all question. This matter, then, need not concern us.

We may, however, provisionally accept the view that Dhyana is real; more real and thus of more importance to ourselves than all other experience. This state has been described not only by the Hindus and Buddhists, but by Mohammedans and Christians. In Christian writings, however, the deeply-seated dogmatic bias has rendered their documents worthless to the average man. They ignore the essential conditions of Dhyana, and insist on the inessential, to a much greater extent than the best Indian writers. But to any one with experience and some knowledge of comparative religion the identity is certain. We may now proceed to Samadhi.
CHAPTER VII
SAMADHI

MORE rubbish has been written about Samadhi than enough; we must endeavour to avoid adding to the heap. Even Patanjali, who is extraordinarily clear and practical in most things, begins to rave when he talks of it. Even if what he said were true he should not have mentioned it; because it does not sound true, and we should make no statement that is  priori improbable without being prepared to back it up with the fullest proofs. But it is more than likely that his commentators have misunderstood him.

The most reasonable statement, of any acknowledged authority, is that of Vajna Valkya, who says: "By Pranayama impurities of the body are thrown out; by Dharana the impurities of the mind; by Pratyahara the impurities of attachment; and by Samadhi is taken off everything that hides the lordship of the soul." There is a modest statement in good literary form. If we can only do as well as that!

In the first place, what is the meaning of the term? Etymologically, "Sam" is the Greek {in Greek alphabet: sigma-upsilon-nu--} the English prefix "syn-" meaning "together with." "Adhi" means "Lord," and a reasonable translation of the whole word would be "Union with God," the exact term used by Christian mystics to describe their attainment.

Now there is great confusion, because the Buddhists use the word Samadhi to mean something entirely different, the mere faculty of attention. Thus, with them, to think of a cat is to "make Samadhi" on that cat. They use the word Jhana to describe mystic states. This is excessively misleading, for as we saw in the last section, Dhyana is a preliminary of Samadhi, and of course Jhana is merely the wretched plebeian Pali corruption of it.

    footnote: The vulgarism and provincialism of the Buddhist cannon is infinitely repulsive to all nice minds; and the attempt to use the terms of an ego-centric philosophy to explain the details of a psychology whose principal doctrine is the denial of the ego, was the work of a mischievous idiot. Let us unhesitatingly reject these abominations, these nastinesses of the beggars dressed in rags that they have snatched from corpses, and follow the etymological signification of the word as given above!

There are many kinds of Samadhi.

    footnote: Apparently. That is, the obvious results are different. Possibly the cause is only one, refracted through diverse media.

"Some authors consider Atmadarshana, the Universe as a single phenomenon without conditions, to be the first real Samadhi." If we accept this, we must relegate many less exalted states to the class of Dhyana. Patanjali enumerates a number of these states: to perform these on different things gives different magical powers; or so he says. These need not be debated here. Any one who wants magic powers can get them in dozens of different ways.

Power grows faster than desire. The boy who wants money to buy lead soldiers sets to work to obtain it, and by the time he has got it wants something else instead -- in all probability something just beyond his means.

Such is the splendid history of all spiritual advance! One never stops to take the reward.

We shall therefore not trouble at all about what any Samadhi may or may not bring as far as its results in our lives are concerned. We began this book, it will be remembered, with considerations of death. Death has now lost all meaning. The idea of death depends on those of the ego, and of time; these ideas have been destroyed; and so "Death is swallowed up in victory." We shall now only be interested in what Samadhi is in itself, and in the conditions which cause it.

Let us try a final definition. Dhyana resembles Samadhi in many respects. There is a union of the ego and the non-ego, and a loss of the senses of time and space and causality. Duality in any form is abolished. The idea of time involves that of two consecutive things, that of space two non-coincident things, that of causality two connected things.

These Dhyanic conditions contradict those of normal thought; but in Samadhi they are very much more marked than in Dhyana. And while in the latter it seems like a simple union of two things, in the former it appears as if all things rushed together and united. One might say that in Dhyana there was still this quality latent, that the One existing was opposed to the Many non-existing; in Samadhi the Many and the One are united in a union of Existence with non-Existence. This definition is not made from reflection, but from memory.

Further, it is easy to master the "trick" or "knack" of Dhyana. After a while one can get into that state without preliminary practice; and, looking at it from this point, one seems able to reconcile the two meanings of the word which we debated in the last section. From below Dhyana seems like a trance, an experience so tremendous that one cannot think of anything bigger, while from above it seems merely a state of mind as natural as any other. Frater P., before he had Samadhi, wrote of Dhyana: "Perhaps as a result of the intense control a nervous storm breaks: this we call Dhyana. Samadhi is but an expansion of this, so far as I can see."

Five years later he would not take this view. He would say perhaps that Dhyana was "a flowing of the mind in one unbroken current from the ego to the non-ego without consciousness of either, accompanied by a crescent wonder and bliss." He can understand how that is the natural result of Dhyana, but he cannot call Dhyana in the same way the precursor of Samadhi. Perhaps he does not really know the conditions which induce Samadhi. He can produce Dhyana at will in the course of a few minutes' work; and it often happens with apparent spontaneity: with Samadhi this is unfortunately not the case. He probably can get it at will, but could not say exactly how, or tell how long it might take him; and he could not be "sure" of getting it at all.

One feels "sure" that one can walk a mile along a level road. One knows the conditions, and it would have to be a very extraordinary set of circumstances that would stop one. But though it would be equally fair to say: "I have climbed the Matterhorn and I know I can climb it again," yet there are all sorts of more or less probable circumstances any one of which would prevent success.

Now we do know this, that if thought is kept single and steady, Dhyana results. We do not know whether an intensification of this is sufficient to cause Samadhi, or whether some other circumstances are required. One is science, the other empiricism.

One author says (unless memory deceives) that twelve seconds' steadiness is Dharana, a hundred and forty-four Dhyana, and seventeen hundred and twenty-eight Samadhi. And Vivekananda, commenting on Patanjali, makes Dhyana a mere prolongation of Dharana; but says further: "Suppose I were meditating on a book, and I gradually succeeded in concentrating the mind on it , and perceiving only the internal sensation, the meaning unexpressed in any form, that state of Dhyana is called Samadhi."

Other authors are inclined to suggest that Samadhi results from meditating on subjects that are in themselves worthy. For example, Vivekananda says: "Think of any holy subject:" and explains this as follows: "This does not mean any wicked subject."(!)

Frater P. would not like to say definitely whether he ever got Dhyana from common objects. He gave up the practice after a few months, and meditated on the Cakkras, etc. Also his Dhyana became so common that he gave up recording it. But if he wished to do it this minute he would choose something to excite his "godly fear," or "holy awe," or "wonderment."

    footnote: It is rather a breach of the scepticism which is the basis of our system to admit that anything can be in any way better than another. Do it thus: "A., is a thing that B. thinks 'holy.' It is natural therefore for B. to meditate on it." Get rid of the ego, observe all your actions as if they were another's, and you will avoid ninety-nine percent. of the troubles that await you.

There is no apparent reason why Dhyana should not occur when thinking of any common object of the sea-shore, such as a blue pig; but Frater P.'s constant reference to this as the usual object of his meditation need not be taken "au pied de la lettre." His records of meditation contain no reference to this remarkable animal.

It will be a good thing when organized research has determined the conditions of Samadhi; but in the meantime there seems no particular objection to our following tradition, and using the same objects of meditation as our predecessors, with the single exception which we shall note in due course.

The first class of objects for serious meditation (as opposed to preliminary practice, in which one should keep to simple recognizable objects, whose definiteness is easy to maintain) is "various parts of the body." The Hindus have an elaborate system of anatomy and physiology which has apparently no reference to the facts of the dissecting-room. Prominent in this class are the seven Cakkras, which will be described in Part II. There are also various "nerves", equally mythical.

    WEH footnote: Not quite correct. Western anatomical knowledge has advanced since Crowley wrote this!

The second class is "objects of devotion," such as the idea or form of the Deity, or the heart or body of your Teacher, or of some man whom you respect profoundly. This practice is not to be commended, because it implies a bias of the mind.

You can also meditate on "your dreams." This sounds superstitious; but the idea is that you have already a tendency, independent of your conscious will, to think of those things, which will consequently be easier to think of than others. That this is the explanation is evident from the nature of the preceding and subsequent classes.

You can also meditate on "anything that especially appeals to you."

But in all this one feels inclined to suggest that it will be better and more convincing if the meditation is directed to an object which in itself is apparently unimportant. One does not want the mind to be excited in any way, even by adoration. See the three meditative methods in Liber HHH (Equinox VI.).

    footnote: These are the complements of the three methods of Enthusiasm (A.'.A.'. instruction not yet issued up to March 1912.)

At the same time, one would not like to deny positively that it is very much "easier" to take some idea towards which the mind would naturally flow.

The Hindus assert that the nature of the object determines the Samadhi; that is, the nature of those lower Samadhis which confer so-called "magic powers." For example, there are the Yogapravritti. Meditating on the tip of the nose, one obtains what may be called the "ideal smell"; that is, a smell which is not any particular smell, but is the archetypal smell, of which all actual smells are modifications. It is "the smell which is "not" a smell." This is the only reasonable description; for the experience being contrary to reason, it is only reasonable that the words describing it should be contrary to reason too.

    footnote: Hence the Athanasian Creed. Compare the precise parallel in the Zohar: "The Head which is above all heads; the Head which is "not" a Head.'

Similarly, concentration on the tip of the tongue gives the "ideal taste"; on the dorsum of the tongue, "ideal contact." "Every atom of the body comes into contact with every atom in the Universe all at once," is the description Bhikku Ananda Metteya gives of it. The root of the tongue gives the "ideal sound"; and the pharynx the "ideal sight."

    footnote: Similarly Patanjali tells us that by making Samyama on the strength of an elephant or a tiger, the student acquires that strength. Conquer "the nerve Udana," and you can walk on the water; "Samana," and you begin to flash with light; the "elements" fire, air, earth, and water, and you can do whatever in natural life they prevent you from doing. For instance, by conquering earth, one could take a short cut to Australia; or by conquering water, one can live at the bottom of the Ganges. They say there is a holy man at Benares who does this, coming up only once a year to comfort and instruct his disciples. But nobody need believe this unless he wants to; and you are even advised to conquer that desire should it arise. It will be interesting when science really determines the variables and constants of these equations.

The Samadhi "par excellence," however, is Atmadarshana, which for some, and those not the least instructed, is the first real Samadhi; for even the visions of "God" and of the "Self" are tainted by form. In Atmadarshana the All is manifested as the One: it is the Universe freed from its conditions. Not only are all forms and ideas destroyed, but also those conceptions which are implicit in our ideas of those ideas.

    footnote: This is so complete that not only "Black is White," but "The Whiteness of Black is the essential of its Blackness." "Naught = One = Infinity"; but this is only true "because" of this threefold arrangement, a trinity or "triangle of contradictories."

Each part of the Universe has become the whole, and phenomena and noumena are no longer opposed.

But it is quite impossible to describe this state of mind. One can only specify some of the characteristics, and that in language which forms no image in mind. It is impossible for anyone who experiences it to bring back any adequate memory, nor can we conceive a state transcending this.

There is, however, a very much higher state called Shivadarshana, of which it is only necessary to say that it is the destruction of the previous state, its annihilation; and to understand this blotting-out, one must not imagine "Nothingness" (the only name for it) as negative, but as positive.

The normal mind is a candle in a darkened room. Throw open the shutters, and the sunlight makes the flame invisible. That is a fair image of Dhyana.

    footnote: Here the dictation was interrupted by very prolonged thought due to the difficulty of making the image clear. Virakam.

But the mind refuses to find a simile for Atmadarshana. It seems merely ineffective to say that the rushing together of all the host of heaven would similarly blot out the sunlight. But if we do say so, and wish to form a further image of Shivadarshana, we must imagine ourselves as suddenly recognizing that this universal blaze is darkness; not a light extremely dim compared with some other light, but darkness itself. It is not the change from the minute to the vast, or even from the finite to the infinite. It is the recognition that the positive is merely the negative. The ultimate truth is perceived not only as false, but as the logical contradictory of truth. It is quite useless to elaborate this theme, which has baffled all other minds hitherto. We have tried to say as little as possible rather than as much as possible.

    footnote: Yet all this has come of our desire to be as modest as Yajna Valkya!

Still further from our present purpose would it be to criticise the innumerable discussions which have taken place as to whether this is the ultimate attainment, or what it confers. It is enough if we say that even the first and most transitory Dhyana repays a thousandfold the pains we may have taken to attain it.

And there is this anchor for the beginner, that his work is cumulative: every act directed towards attainment builds up a destiny which must some day come to fruition. May all attain!
SUMMARY

Q.
    What is genius, and how is it produced? 
A.
    Let us take several specimens of the species, and try to find some one thing common to all which is not found in other species. 
Q.
    Is there any such thing? 
A.
    Yes: all geniuses have the habit of concentration of thought, and usually need long periods of solitude to acquire this habit. In particular the greatest religious geniuses have all retired from the world at one time or another in their lives, and begun to preach immediately on their return. 
Q.
    Of what advantage is such a retirement? One would expect that a man who so acted would find himself on his return out of touch with his civilization, and in every way less capable than when he left. 
A.
    But each claims, though in different language, to have gained in his absence some superhuman power. 
Q.
    Do you believe this? 
A.
    It becomes us ill to reject the assertions of those who are admittedly the greatest of mankind until we can refute them by proof, or at least explain how they may have been mistaken. In this case each teacher left instructions for us to follow. The only scientific method is for us to repeat their experiments, and so confirm or disprove their results. 
Q.
    But their instructions differ widely! 
A.
    Only in so far as each was bound by conditions of time, race, climate and language. There is essential identity in the method. 
Q.
    Indeed! 
A.
    It was the great work of the life of Frater Perdurabo to prove this. Studying each religious practice of each great religion on the spot, he was able to show the Identity-in-diversity of all, and to formulate a method free from all dogmatic bias, and based only on the ascertained facts of anatomy, physiology, and psychology. 
Q.
    Can you give me a brief abstract of this method? 
A.
    The main idea is that the Infinite, the Absolute, God, the Over-soul, or whatever you may prefer to call it, is always present; but veiled or masked by the thoughts of the mind, just as one cannot hear a heart-beat in a noisy city. 
Q.
    Yes? 
A.
    Then to obtain knowledge of That, it is only necessary to still all thoughts. 
Q.
    But in sleep thought is stilled? 
A.
    True, perhaps, roughly speaking; but the perceiving function is stilled also. 
Q.
    Then you wish to obtain a perfect vigilance and attention of the mind, uninterrupted by the rise of thoughts? 
A.
    Yes. 
Q.
    And how do you proceed? 
A.
    Firstly, we still the body by the practice called Asana, and secure its ease and the regularity of its functions by Pranayama. Thus no messages from the body will disturb the mind.
    Secondly, by Yama and Niyama, we still the emotions and passions, and thus prevent them arising to disturb the mind.
    Thirdly, by Pratyahara we analyse the mind yet more deeply, and begin to control and suppress thought in general of whatever nature.
    Fourthly, we suppress all other thoughts by a direct concentration upon a single thought. This process, which leads to the highest results, consists of three parts, Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi, grouped under the single term Samyama. 
Q.
    How can I obtain further knowledge and experience of this? 
A.
    The A.'.A.'. is an organization whose heads have obtained by personal experience to the summit of this science. They have founded a system by which every one can equally attain, and that with an ease and speed which was previously impossible. 

The first grade in Their system is that of
STUDENT.

A Student must possess the following books:

    The Equinox,
    777.
    Konx Om Pax.
    Collected Works of A. Crowley; Tannhauser, The Sword of Song, Time, Eleusis. 3 vols.
    Raja Yoga, by Swami Vivekananda.
    The Shiva Sanhita, or the Hathayoga Pradipika.
    The Tao Teh King and the writings of Kwang Tze: S.B.E. xxxix, xl.
    The Spiritual Guide, by Miguel de Molinos.
    Rituel et Dogme de la Haute Magie, by Eliphas Levi, or its translation by A. E. Waite.
    The Goetia of the Lemegeton of Solomon the King. 

These books should be well studied in any case in conjunction with the second part -- Magick -- of this Book IV.

Study of these books will give a thorough grounding in the intellectual side of Their system.

After three months the Student is examined in these books, and if his knowledge of them is found satisfactory, he may become a Probationer, receiving Liber LXI and the secret holy book, Liber LXV. The principal point of this grade is that the Probationer has a master appointed, whose experience can guide him in his work.

He may select any practices that he prefers, but in any case must keep an exact record, so that he may discover the relation of cause and effect in his working, and so that the A.'.A.'. may judge of his progress, and direct his further studies.

After a year of probation he may be admitted a Neophyte of the A.'.A.'., and receive the secret holy book Liber VII.

These are the principal instructions for practice which every probationer should follow out:

Libri E, A, O, III, XXX, CLXXV, CC, CCVI, CMXIII.



Sacred texts  Thelema 

Based on the Sangreal edition of 1969 e.v., with the "Interlude" restored (absent from the Sangreal edition). Diagrams noted but not described.

Copyright (c) Ordo Templi Orientis
THERE are seven keys to the great gate,
Being eight in one and one in eight.
First, let the body of thee be still,
Bound by the cerements of will,
Corpse-rigid; thus thou mayst abort
The fidget-babes that tease the thought.
Next, let the breath-rhythm be low,
Easy, regular, and slow;
So that thy being be in tune
With the great sea's Pacific swoon.
Third, let thy life be pure and calm,
Swayed softly as a windless palm.
Fourth, let the will-to-live be bound
To the one love of the profound.
Fifth, let the thought, divinely free
From sense, observe its entity.
Watch every thought that springs; enhance
Hour after hour thy vigilance!
Intense and keen, turned inward, miss
No atom of analysis!
Sixth, on one thought securely pinned
Still every whisper of the wind!
So like a flame straight and unstirred
Burn up thy being in one word!
Next, still that ecstasy, prolong
Thy meditation steep and strong,
Slaying even God, should He distract
Thy attention from the chosen act!
Last, all these things in one o'erpowered,
Time that the midnight blossom flowered!
The oneness is. Yet even in this,
My son, thou shall not do amiss
If thou restrain the expression, shoot
Thy glance to rapture's darkling root,
Discarding name, form, sight, and stress
Even of this high consciousness;
Pierce to the heart! I leave thee here:
Thou art the Master. I revere
Thy radiance that rolls afar,
O Brother of the Silver Star!
CROWLEY "AHA!"

Issued by order of
the GREAT WHITE
BROTHERHOOD
known as the A.'.A.'.

Witness our Seal,

N.'.'

Praemonstrator-General

{photograph: The colotype of Crowley from EQUINOX I, 3, just before page 11, titled underneath "ALEISTER CROWLEY"}

PART II -- MAGICK
PRELIMINARY REMARKS
{photograph: (probably colotype original) of Crowley with implements, titled underneath "THE MAGICIAN IN HIS ROBE AND CROWN, ARMED WITH WAND, CUP, SWORD, PANTACLE, BELL, BOOK, AND HOLY OIL."}

CEREMONIAL MAGICK,

    footnote: The old spelling MAGICK has been adopted throughout in order to distinguish the Science of the Magi from all its counterfeits.

THE TRAINING FOR MEDITATION
PRELIMINARY REMARKS
HITHERTO we have spoken only of the mystic path; and we have kept particularly to the practical exoteric side of it. Such difficulties as we have mentioned have been purely natural obstacles. For example, the great question of the surrender of the self, which bulks so largely in most mystical treatises, has not been referred to at all. We have said only what a man must do; we have not considered at all what that doing may involve. The rebellion of the will against the terrible discipline of meditation has not been discussed; one may now devote a few words to it.

There is no limit to what theologians call "wickedness." Only by experience can the student discover the ingenuity of the mind in trying to escape from control. He is perfectly safe so long as he sticks to meditation, doing no more and no less than that which we have prescribed; but the mind will probably not let him remain in that simplicity. This fact is the root of all the legends about the "Saint" being tempted by the '"Devil." Consider the parable of Christ in the Wilderness, where he is tempted to use his magical power, to do anything but the thing that should be done. These attacks on the will are as bad as the thoughts which intrude upon Dharana. It would almost seem as if one could not succesfully practice meditation until the will had become so strong that no force in the Universe could either bend or break it. Before concentrating the lower principle, the mind, one must concentrate the higher principle, the Will. Failure to understand this has destroyed the value of all attempts to teach "Yoga," "Menticulture," "New Thought," and the like.

There are methods of training the will, by which it is easy to check one's progress.

Every one knows the force of habit. Every one knows that if you keep on acting in a particular way, that action becomes easier, and at last absolutely natural.

All religions have devised practices for this purpose. If you keep on praying with your lips long enough, you will one day find yourself praying in your heart.

The whole question has been threshed out and organized by wise men of old; they have made a Science of Life complete and perfect; and they have given to it the name of MAGICK. It is the chief secret of the Ancients, and if the keys have never been actually lost, they have certainly been little used.

    footnote: The holders of those keys have always kept very quiet about it. This has been especially necessary in Europe, because of the dominance of persecuting churches.

Again, the confusion of thought caused by the ignorance of the people who did not understand it has discredited the whole subject. It is now our task to re-establish this science in its perfection.

To do this we must criticize the Authorities; some of them have made it too complex, others have completely failed in such simple matters as coherence. Many of the writers are empirics, still more mere scribes, while by far the largest class of all is composed of stupid charlatans.

We shall consider a simple form of magick, harmonized from many systems old and new, describing the various weapons of the Magician and the furniture of his temple. We shall explain to what each really corresponds, and discuss the construction and the use of everything.

The Magician works in a Temple; the Universe, which is (be it remembered!) conterminous with himself.

    footnote: By "yourself" you mean the contents of your consciousness. All without does not exist for you.

In this temple a Circle is drawn upon the floor for the limitation of his working. This circle is protected by divine names, the influences on which he relies to keep out hostile thoughts. Within the circle stands an Altar, the solid basis on which he works, the foundation of all. Upon the Altar are his Wand, Cup, Sword, and Pantacle, to represent his Will, his Understanding, his Reason, and the lower parts of his being, respectively. On the Altar, too, is a phial of Oil, surrounded by a Scourge, a Dagger, and a Chain, while above the Altar hangs a Lamp. The Magician wears a Crown, a single Robe, and a Lamen, and he bears a Book of Conjurations and a Bell.

The oil consecrates everything that is touched with it; it is his aspiration; all acts performed in accordance with that are holy. The scourge tortures him; the dagger wounds him; the chain binds him. It is by virtue of these three that his aspiration remains pure, and is able to consecrate all other things. He wears a crown to affirm his lordship, his divinity; a robe to symbolize silence, and a lamen to declare his work. The book of spells or conjurations is his magical record, his Karma. In the East is the Magick Fire, in which all burns up at last.

    footnote: He needs nothing else but the apparatus here described for invocation, by which he calls down that which is above him and within him; but for evocations, by which he calls forth that which is below him and without him, he may place a triangle without the circle.

We will now consider each of these matters in detail.

CHAPTER I
THE TEMPLE

THE Temple represents the external Universe. The Magician must take it as he finds it, so that it is of no particular shape; yet we find written, Liber VII, vi, 2: "We made us a Temple of stones in the shape of the Universe, even as thou didst wear openly and I concealed." This shape is the Vesica Piscis; but it is only the greatest of the Magicians who can thus fashion the Temple. There may, however, be some choice of rooms; this refers to the power of the Magician to reincarnate in a suitable body.

{diagram on this page: a magical circle reminiscent of an illustration in the "Treasure House of Images" in the Equinox. Caption below: "THE CIRCLE".}

CHAPTER II
THE CIRCLE

THE Circle announces the Nature of the Great Work.

Though the Magician has been limited in his choice of room, he is more or less able to choose what part of the room he will work in. He will consider convenience and possibility. His circle should not be too small and cramp his movements; it should not be so large that he has long distances to traverse. Once the circle is made and consecrated, the Magician must not leave it, or even lean outside, lest he be destroyed by the hostile forces that are without.

He chooses a circle rather than any other lineal figure for many reasons; e.g.,

1. He affirms thereby his identity with the infinite.

2. He affirms the equal balance of his working; since all points on the circumference are equidistant from the centre.

3. He affirms the limitation implied by his devotion to the Great Work. He no longer wanders about aimlessly in the world.

The centre of this circle is the centre of the Tau of ten squares which is in the midst, as shown in the illustration. The Tau and the circle together make one form of the Rosy Cross, the uniting of subject and object which is the Great Work, and which is symbolized sometimes as this cross and circle, sometimes as the Lingam-Yoni, sometimes as the Ankh or Crux Ansata, sometimes by the Spire and Nave of a church or temple, and sometimes as a marriage feast, mystic marriage, spiritual marriage, "chymical nuptials," and in a hundred other ways. Whatever the form chosen, it is the symbol of the Great Work.

This place of his working therefore declares the nature and object of the Work. Those persons who have supposed that the use of these symbols implied worship of the generative organs, merely attributed to the sages of every time and country minds of a calibre equal to their own.

The Tau is composed of ten squares for the ten Sephiroth.

    footnote: The Ten Sephiroth are the Ten Units. In one system of classification (see "777") these are so arranged, and various ideas are so attributed to them, that they have been made to mean anything. The more you know, the more these numbers mean to you.

About this Tau is escribed a triangle, which is inscribed in the great Circle; but of the triangle nothing is actually marked but the three corners, the areas defined by the cutting of the lines bounding this triangle. This triangle is only visible in the parts which are common to two of the sides; they have therefore the shape of the diamond, one form of the Yoni. The significance of this is too complex for our simple treatise; it may be studied in Crowley's "Berashith."

The size of the whole figure is determined by the size of one square of the Tau. And the size of this square is that of the base of the Altar, which is placed upon Maukuth. It will follow then that, in spite of the apparent freedom of the Magician to do anything he likes, he is really determined absolutely; for as the Altar must have a base proportionate to its height, and as that height must be convenient for the Magician, the size of the whole will depend upon his own stature. It is easy to draw a moral lesson from these considerations. We will merely indicate this one, that the scope of any man's work depends upon his own original genius. Even the size of the weapons must be determined by necessary proportion. The exceptions to this rule are the Lamp, which hangs from the roof, above the centre of the Circle, above the square of Tiphereth; and the Oil, whose phial is so small that it will suit any altar.

On the Circle are inscribed the Names of God; the Circle is of green, and the names are in flaming vermilion, of the same colour as the Tau. Without the Circle are nine pentagrams equidistant,

    footnote: Some magicians prefer seven lamps, for the seven Spirits of God that are before the Throne. Each stands in a heptagram, and in each angle of the heptagram is a letter, so that the seven names (see "Equinox VII") are spelt out. But this is a rather different symbolism. Of course in ordinary specialised working the number of lamps depends on the nature of the work, "e.g.," three for works of Saturn, eight for works Mercuial, and so on.

in the centre of each of which burns a small Lamp; these are the "Fortresses upon the Frontiers of the Abyss." See the eleventh Aethyr, Liber 418 ("Equinox V"). They keep off those forces of darkness which might otherwise break in.

The names of God form a further protection. The Magician may consider what names he will use; but each name should in some way symbolise this Work in its method and accomplishment. It is impossible here to enter into this subject fully; the discovery or construction of suitable names might occupy the most learned Qabalist for many years.

These nine lamps were originally candles made of human fat, the fat of enemies

    footnote: Or sometimes of "birth-strangled babes," "i.e.," of thoughts slain ere they could arise into consciousness.

slain by the Magician; they thus served as warnings to any hostile force of what might be expected if it caused trouble. To-day such candles are difficult to procure; and it is perhaps simpler to use beeswax. The honey has been taken by the Magician; nothing is left of the toil of all those hosts of bees but the mere shell, the fuel of light. This beeswax is also used in the construction of the Pantacle, and this forms a link between the two symbols. The Pantacle is the food of the Magus; and some of it he gives up in order to give light to that which is without. For these lights are only apparently hostile to intrusion; they serve to illuminate the Circle and the Names of God, and so to bring the first and outmost symbols of initiation within the view of the profane.

These candles stand upon pentagrams, which symbolize Geburah, severity, and give protection; but also represent the microcosm, the four elements crowned by Spirit, the Will of man perfected in its aspiration to the Higher. They are placed outside the Circle to attract the hostile forces, to give them the first inkling of the Great Work, which they too must some day perform.

{diagram on this page: A double cubic altar with universal sigil on top, sigils of the 4 Enochian elemental kings around sides in top half and Enochian watch towers (elemental squares) around sides in bottom half. There is a scale at bottom of the diagram and the caption under that: "THE ALTAR. SIDE DESIGNS FROM DR. DEE, AS IN EQUINOX VII."}

CHAPTER III
THE ALTAR

THE Altar represents the solid basis of the work, the fixed Will

    footnote: It represents the extension of Will. Will is the Dyad (see section on the Wand); 2 x 2 = 4. So the altar is foursquare, and also its ten squares show 4. 10 = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4.

of the Magician; and the law under which he works. Within this altar everything is kept, since everything is subject to law. Except the lamp.

According to some authorities the Altar should be made of oak to represent the stubbornness and rigidity of law; others would make it of Acacia, for Acacia is the symbol of resurrection.

The Altar is a double cube, which is a rough way of symbolizing the Great Work; for the doubling of the cube, like the squaring of the circle, was one of the great problems of antiquity. The surface of this Altar is composed of ten squares. The top is Kether, and the bottom Malkuth. The height of the Altar is equal to the height above the ground of the navel of the Magician. The Altar is connected with the Ark of the Covenant, Noah's Ark, the nave ("navis," a ship) of the Church, and many other symbols of antiquity, whose symbolism has been well worked out in an anonymous book called "The Cannon,"

    WEH footnote: written by William Stirling

(Elkin Mathews), which should be studied carefully before constructing the Altar.

For this Altar must embody the Magician's knowledge of the laws of Nature, which are the laws through which he works.

He should endeavour to make geometrical constructions to symbolize cosmic measurements. For example, he may take the two diagonals as (say) the diameter of the sun. Then the side of the altar will be found to have a length equal to some other cosmic measure, a vesica drawn on the side some other, a "rood cross" within the vesica yet another. Each Magician should work out his own system of symbolism -- and he need not confine himself to cosmic measurements. He might, for example, find some relation to express the law of inverse squares.

The top of the Altar shall be covered with gold, and on this gold should be engraved some such figure as the Holy Oblation, or the New Jerusalem, or, if he have the skill, the Microcosm of Vitruvius, of which we give illustrations.

On the sides of the Altar are also sometimes drawn the great tablets of the elements, and the sigils of the holy elemental kings, as shown in The Equinox, No. VII; for these are syntheses of the forces of Nature. Yet these are rather special than general symbols, and this book purports to treat only of the grand principles of working.

{diagrams on this page, at top the microcosm of Vitruvius from the title page decoration (not frontispiece as is sometimes said) to Robert Fludd's "Utriusque Cosmi Maioris scilicet et Minoris Metaphysica, Physica, Atque Technica Historia", based on a Renaissance copy of Vitruvius' 1st century "De Architectura" as interpreted by Cesariano in 1521, minus Fludd's rope, clouds and winged fawn+hourglass, with the caption beneath "DESIGN SUITABLE FOR TOP OF ALTAR", and below that a geometrical figure of the planets and stars from "The Cannon" fig. 3, p. 30, chap. II. with the under caption "THE HOLY OBLATION"}

{diagram on this page: Inside a dashed equilateral triangle are a scourge, chain, dagger and a wide, low perfume bottle shaped like a woman's breast with nipple, below this is a scale in inches and below that the caption "THE SCOURGE, THE DAGGER, AND THE CHAIN; ENCLOSING THE PHIAL FOR THE HOLY OIL."}

CHAPTER IV
THE SCOURGE, THE DAGGER, AND THE CHAIN

THE Scourge, the Dagger, and the Chain, represent the three alchemical principles of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt. These are not the substances which we now call by these names; they represent "principles," whose operations chemists have found it more convenient to explain in other ways. But Sulphur represents the energy of things, Mercury their fluidity, Salt their fixity. They are analogous to Fire, Air and Water; but they mean rather more, for they represent something deeper and subtler, and yet more truly active. An almost exact analogy is given by the three Gunas of the Hindus; Sattvas, Rajas, and Tamas. Sattvas is Mercury, equable, calm, clear; Rajas is Sulphur, active, excitable, even fierce; Tamas is Salt, thick, sluggish, heavy, dark.

    footnote: There is a long description of these three Gunas in the Bhagavadgita.

But Hindu philosophy is so occupied with the main idea that only the Absolute is worth anything, that it tends to consider these Gunas (even Sattvas) as evil. This is a correct view, but only from above; and we prefer, if we are truly wise, to avoid this everlasting wail which characterizes the thought of the Indian peninsula: "Everything is sorrow," etc. Accepting their doctrine of the two phases of the Absolute, we must, if we are to be consistent, class the two phases together, either as good or as bad; if one is good and the other bad we are back again in that duality, to avoid which we invented the Absolute.

The Christian idea that sin was worth while because salvation was so much more worth while, that redemption is so splendid that innocence was well lost, is more satisfactory. St. Paul says: "Where sin abounded, there did grace much more abound. Then shall we do evil that good may come? God forbid." But (clearly!) it is exactly what God Himself did, or why did He create Satan with the germ of his "fall" in him?

Instead of condemning the three qualities outright, we should consider them as parts of a sacrament. This particular aspect of the Scourge, the Dagger, and the Chain, suggests the sacrament of penance.

The Scourge is Sulphur: its application excites our sluggish natures; and it may further be used as an instrument of correction, to castigate rebellious volitions. It is applied to the Nephesh, the Animal Soul, the natural desires.

The Dagger is Mercury: it is used to calm too great heat, by the letting of blood; and it is this weapon which is plunged into the side or heart of the Magician to fill the Holy Cup. Those faculties which come between the appetites and the reason are thus dealt with.

The Chain is Salt: it serves to bind the wandering thoughts; and for this reason is placed about the neck of the Magician, where Daath is situated.

These instruments also remind us of pain, death, and bondage. Students of the gospel will recollect that in the martyrdom of Christ these three were used, the dagger being replaced by the nails.

    footnote: This is true of all magical instruments. The Hill of Golgotha is a circle, and the Cross the Tau. Christ had robe, crown, sceptre, etc.; this thesis should one day be fully worked out.

The Scourge should be made with a handle of iron; the lash is composed of nine strands of fine copper wire, in each of which are twisted small pieces of lead. Iron represents severity, copper love, and lead austerity.

The Dagger is made of steel inlaid with gold; and the hilt is also golden.

The chain{Sic} is made of soft iron. It has 333 links.

    footnote: See The Equinox, No. V, "The Vision and the Voice": Xth Aethyr.

It is now evident why these weapons are grouped around the phial of clear crystal in which is kept the Holy Oil.

The Scourge keeps the aspiration keen: the Dagger expresses the determination to sacrifice all; and the Chain restricts any wandering.

We may now consider the Holy Oil itself.

CHAPTER V
THE HOLY OIL

THE Holy Oil is the Aspiration of the Magician; it is that which consecrates him to the performance of the Great Work; and such is its efficacy that it also consecrates all the furniture of the Temple and the instruments thereof. It is also the grace or chrism; for this aspiration is not ambition; it is a quality bestowed from above. For this reason the Magician will anoint first the top of his head before proceeding to consecrate the lower centres in their turn.

This oil is of a pure golden colour; and when placed upon the skin it should burn and thrill through the body with an intensity as of fire. It is the pure light translated into terms of desire. It is not the Will of the Magician, the desire of the lower to reach the higher; but it is that spark of the higher in the Magician which wishes to unite the lower with itself.

Unless therefore the Magician be first anointed with this oil, all his work will be wasted and evil.

This oil is compounded of four substances. The basis of all is the oil of the olive. The olive is, traditionally, the gift of Minerva, the Wisdom of God, the Logos. In this are dissolved three other oils; oil of myrrh, oil of cinnamon, oil of galangal. The Myrrh is attributed to Binah, the Great Mother, who is both the understanding of the Magician and that sorrow and compassion which results from the contemplation of the Universe. The Cinnamon represents Tiphereth, the Sun -- the Son, in whom Glory and Suffering are identical. The Galangal represents both Kether and Malkuth, the First and the Last, the One and the Many, since in this Oil they are One.

These oils taken together represent therefore the whole Tree of Life. The ten Sephiroth are blended into the perfect gold.

This Oil cannot be prepared from crude myrrh, cinnamon, and galangal. The attempt to do so only gives a brown mud with which the oil will not mix. These substances must be themselves refined into pure oils before the final combination.

This perfect Oil is most penetrating and subtle. Gradually it will spread itself, a glistening film, over every object in the Temple. Each of these objects will then flame in the light of the Lamp. This Oil is like that which was in the widow's curse: it renews and multiplies itself miraculously; its perfume fills the whole Temple; it is the soul of which the grosser perfume is the body.

The phial which contains the Oil should be of clear rock crystal, and some magicians have fashioned it in the shape of the female breast, for that it is the true nourishment of all that lives. For this reason also it has been made of mother-of-pearl and stoppered with a ruby.

CHAPTER VI
THE WAND

THE Magical Will is in its essence twofold, for it presupposes a beginning and an end; to will to be a thing is to admit that you are not that thing.

Hence to will anything but the supreme thing, is to wander still further from it -- any will but that to give up the self to the Beloved is Black Magick -- yet this surrender is so simple an act that to our complex minds it is the most difficult of all acts; and hence training is necessary. Further, the Self surrendered must not be less than the All-Self; one must not come before the altar of the Most High with an impure or an imperfect offering. As it is written in Liber LXV, "To await Thee is the end, not the beginning."

This training may lead through all sorts of complications, varying according to the nature of the student, and hence it may be necessary for him at any moment to will all sorts of things which to others might seem unconnected with the goal. Thus it is not "a priori" obvious why a billiard player should need a file.

Since, then, we may want "anything," let us see to it that our will is strong enough to obtain anything we want without loss of time.

It is therefore necessary to develop the will to its highest point, even though the last task but one is the total surrender of this will. Partial surrender of an imperfect will is of no account in Magick.

The will being a lever, a fulcrum is necessary; this fulcrum is the main aspiration of the student to attain. All wills which are not dependent upon this principal will are so many leakages; they are like fat to the athlete.

The majority of the people in this world are ataxic; they cannot coordinate their mental muscles to make a purposed movement. They have no real will, only a set of wishes, many of which contradict others. The victim wobbles from one to the other (and it is no less wobbling because the movements may occasionally be very violent) and at the end of life the movements cancel each other out. Nothing has been achieved; except the one thing of which the victim is not conscious: the destruction of his own character, the confirming of indecision. Such an one is torn limb from limb by Choronzon.

How then is the will to be trained? All these wishes, whims, caprices, inclinations, tendencies, appetites, must be detected, examined, judged by the standard of whether they help or hinder the main purpose, and treated accordingly.

{diagram on this page: Solomonic sword vertical to the left, flame carved wand vertical to the right, cup supported by lotus flower tripod (four legs or three?) center top, circle at center bottom. A vertical scale is to the extreme right and this caption is below: "THE WAND, CUP, SWORD, AND DISK OR PANTACLE (drawn to scale)."}

Vigilance and courage are obviously required. I was about to add self-denial, in deference to conventional speech; but how could I call that self-denial which is merely denial of those things which hamper the self? It is not suicide to kill the germs of malaria in one's blood.

Now there are very great difficulties to be overcome in the training of the mind. Perhaps the greatest is forgetfulness, which is probably the worst form of what the Buddhists call ignorance. Special practices for training the memory may be of some use as a preliminary for persons whose memory is naturally poor. In any case the Magical Record prescribed for Probationers of the A.'.A.'. is useful and necessary.

Above all the practices of Liber III must be done again and again, for these practices develop not only vigilance but those inhibiting centres in the brain which are, according to some psychologists, the mainspring of the mechanism by which civilized man has raised himself above the savage.

So far it has been spoken, as it were, in the negative. Aaron's rod has become a serpent, and swallowed the serpents of the other Magicians; it is now necessary to turn it once more into a rod.

    footnote: As everyone knows, the word used in Exodus for a Rod of Almond is {{Hebrew letters: Mem-tet-Hay Hay-Shin-Qof-Dalet

}, adding to 463. Now 400 is Tau, the path leading from Malkuth to Yesod. Sixty is Samekh, the path leading leading {{sic}} from Yesod to Tiphereth; and 3 is Gimel, the path leading thence to Kether. The whole rod therefore gives the paths from the Kingdom to the Crown.}

This Magical Will is the wand in your hand by which the Great Work is accomplished, by which the Daughter is not merely set upon the throne of the Mother, but assumed into the Highest.

    footnote: In one, the best, system of Magick, the Absolute is called the Crown, God is called the Father, the Pure Soul is called the Mother, the Holy Guardian Angel is called the Son, and the Natural Soul is called the Daughter. The Son purifies the Daughter by wedding her; she thus becomes the Mother, the uniting of whom with the Father absorbs all into the Crown. See Liber CDXVIII.

The Magick Wand is thus the principal weapon of the Magus; and the "name" of that wand is the Magical Oath.

The will being twofold is in Chokmah, who is the Logos, the word; hence some have said that the word is the will. Thoth the Lord of Magic {sic} is also the Lord of Speech; Hermes the messenger bears the Caduceus.

Word should express will: hence the Mystic Name of the Probationer is the expression of his highest Will.

There are, of course, few Probationers who understand themselves sufficiently to be able to formulate this will to themselves, and therefore at the end of their probation they choose a new name.

It is convenient therefore for the student to express his will by taking Magical Oaths.

Since such an oath is irrevocable it should be well considered; and it is better not to take any oath permanently; because with increase of understanding may come a perception of the incompatibility of the lesser oath with the greater.

This is indeed almost certain to occur, and it must be remembered that as the whole essence of the will is its one-pointedness,

    footnote: The Top of the Wand is in Kether -- which is one; and the Qliphoth of Kether are the Thaumiel, opposing heads that rend and devour each other.

a dilemma of this sort is the worst in which the Magus can find himself.

Another great point in this consideration of Magick Vows is to keep them in their proper place. They must be taken for a clearly defined purpose, a clearly understood purpose, and they must never be allowed to go beyond it.

It is a virtue in a diabetic not to eat sugar, but only in reference to his own condition. It is not a virtue of universal import. Elijah said on one occasion: "I do well to be angry;" but such occasions are rare.

Moreover, one man's meat is another man's poison. An oath of poverty might be very useful for a man who was unable intelligently to use his wealth for the single end proposed; to another it would be simply stripping himself of energy, causing him to waste his time over trifles.

There is no power which cannot be pressed in to the service of the Magical Will: it is only the temptation to value that power for itself which offends.

One does not say: "Cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground?" unless repeated prunings have convinced the gardener that the growth must always be a rank one.

"If thine hand offend thee, cut it off!" is the scream of a weakling. If one killed a dog the first time it misbehaved itself, not many would pass the stage of puppyhood.

The best vow, and that of most universal application, is the vow of Holy Obedience; for not only does it lead to perfect freedom, but is a training in that surrender which is the last task.

    WEH footnote: Of all Crowley's views, this is the most controversial. It appears to fly in the face of Thelema. There is high merit in a vow of obedience, and necessity; but the merit is to be found in the "small print." To receive a vow of obedience from another implies perfection in the teacher, a thing impossible to mortals but possible to roles. To make a vow of obedience to a mortal is foolish unless conditions of circumstance and duration are involved.

It has this great value, that it never gets rusty. If the superior to whom the vow is taken knows his business, he will quickly detect which things are really displeasing to his pupil, and familiarize him with them.

Disobedience to the superior is a contest between these two wills in the inferior. The will expressed in his vow, which is the will linked to his highest will by the fact that he has taken it in order to develop that highest will, contends with the temporary will, which is based only on temporary considerations.

The Teacher should then seek gently and firmly to key up the pupil, little by little, until obedience follows command without reference to what that command may be; as Loyola wrote: "perinde ac cadaver."

No one has understood the Magical Will better than Loyola; in his system the individual was forgotten. The will of the General was instantly echoed by every member of the Order; hence the Society of Jesus became the most formidable of the religious organizations of the world.

That of the Old Man of the Mountains was perhaps the next best.

The defect in Loyola's system is that the General was not God, and that owing to various other considerations he was not even necessarily the best man in the Order.

To become General of the Order he must have willed to become General of the Order; and because of this he could be nothing more.

To return to the question of the development of the Will. It is always something to pluck up the weeds, but the flower itself needs tending. Having crushed all volitions in ourselves, and if necessary in others, which we find opposing our real Will, that Will itself will grow naturally with greater freedom. But it is not only necessary to purify the temple itself and consecrate it; invocations must be made. Hence it is necessary to be constantly doing things of a positive, not merely of a negative nature, to affirm that Will.

Renunciation and sacrifice are necessary, but they are comparatively easy. There are a hundred ways of missing, and only one of hitting. To avoid eating beef is easy; to eat nothing but pork is very difficult.

Levi recommends hat at times the Magical Will itself should be cut off, on the same principle as one can always work better after a "complete change." Levi is doubtless right, but he must be understood as saying this "for the hardness of men's hearts." The turbine is more efficient than a reciprocating engine; and his counsel is only good for the beginner.

Ultimately the Magical Will so identifies itself with the man's whole being that it becomes unconscious, and is as constant a force as gravitation. One may even be surprised at one's own acts, and have to reason out their connection. But let it be understood that when the Will has thus really raised itself to the height of Destiny, the man is no more likely to do wrong than he is to float off into the air.

One may be asked whether there is not a conflict between this development of the Will and Ethics.

The answer is Yes.

In the Grand Grimoire we are told "to buy an egg without haggling"; and attainment, and the next step in the path of attainment, is that pearl of great price, which when a man hath found he straightway selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that pearl.

With many people custom and habit -- of which ethics is but the social expression --- are the things most difficult to give up: and it is a useful practice to break any habit just to get into the way of being free from that form of slavery. Hence we have practices for breaking up sleep, for putting our bodies into strained and unnatural positions, for doing difficult exercises of breathing -- all these, apart from any special merit they may have in themselves for any particular purpose, have the main merit that the man forces himself to do them despite any conditions that may exist. Having conquered internal resistance one may conquer external resistance more easily.

In a steam boat the engine must first overcome its own inertia before it can attack the resistance of the water.

When the will has thus ceased to be intermittent, it becomes necessary to consider its size. Gravitation gives an acceleration of thirty-two feet per second on this planet, on the moon very much less. And a Will, however single and however constant, may still be of no particular use, because the circumstances which oppose it may be altogether too strong, or because it is for some reason unable to get into touch with them. It is useless to wish for the moon. If one does so, one must consider by what means that Will may be made effective.

And though a man may have a tremendous Will in one direction it need not always be sufficient to help him in another; it may even be stupid.

There is the story of the man who practised for forty years to walk across the Ganges; and, having succeeded, was reproached by his Holy Guru, who said: "You are a great fool. All your neighbours have been crossing every day on a raft for two pice."

This occurs to most, perhaps to all, of us in our careers. We spend infinite pains to learn something, to achieve something, which when gained does not seem worth even the utterance of the wish.

But this is a wrong view to take. The discipline necessary in order to learn Latin will stand us in good stead when we wish to do something quite different.

At school our masters punished us; when we leave school, if we have not learned to punish ourselves, we have learned nothing.

In fact the only danger is that we may value the achievement in itself. The boy who prides himself on his school knowledge is in danger of becoming a college professor.

So the Guru of the water-walking Hindu only meant that it was now time to be dissatisfied with what he had done -- and to employ his powers to some better end.

And, incidentally, since the divine Will is one, it will be found that there is no capacity which is not necessarily subservient to the destiny of the man who possesses it.

One may be unable to tell when a thread of a particular colour will be woven into the carpet of Destiny. It is only when the carpet is finished and seen from a proper distance that the position of that particular strand is seen to be necessary. From this one is tempted to break a lance on that most ancient battlefield, free-will and destiny.

But even though every man is "determined" so that every action is merely the passive resultant of the sum-total of the forces which have acted upon him from eternity, so that his own Will is only the echo of the Will of the Universe, yet that consciousness of "free-will" is valuable; and if he really understands it as being the partial and individual expression of that internal motion in a Universe whose sum is rest, by so much will he feel that harmony, that totality. And though the happiness which he experiences may be criticised as only one scale of a balance in whose other scale is an equal misery, there are those who hold that misery consists only in the feeling of separation from the Universe, and that consequently all may cancel out among the lesser feelings, leaving only that infinite bliss which is one phase of the infinite consciousness of that ALL. Such speculations are somewhat beyond the scope of the present remarks. It is of no particular moment to observe that the elephant and flea can be no other than they are; but we do perceive that one is bigger than the other. That is the fact of practical importance.

We do know that persons can be trained to do things which they could not do without training -- and anyone who remarks that you cannot train a person unless it is his destiny to be trained is quite unpractical. Equally it is the destiny of the trainer to train. There is a fallacy in the determinist argument similar to the fallacy which is the root of all "systems" of gambling at Roulette. The odds are just over three to one against red coming up twice running; but after red has come up once the conditions are changed.

    WEH footnote: Exactly four to one before and even after.

It would be useless to insist on such a point were it not for the fact that many people confuse Philosophy with Magick. Philosophy is the enemy of Magick. Philosophy assures us that after all nothing matters, and that "che sara sara."

In practical life, and Magick is the most practical of the Arts of life, this difficulty does not occur. It is useless to argue with a man who is running to catch a train that he may be destined not to catch it; he just runs, and if he could spare breath would say "Blow destiny!"

It has been said earlier that the real Magical Will must be toward the highest attainment, and this can never be until the flowering of the Magical Understanding. The Wand must be made to grow in length as well as in strength; it need not do so of its own nature.

The ambition of every boy is to be an engine-driver. Some attain it, and remain there all their lives.

But in the majority of cases the Understanding grows faster than the Will, and long before the boy is in a position to attain his wish he has already forgotten it.

In other cases the Understanding never grows beyond a certain point, and the Will persists without intelligence.

The business man (for example) has wished for ease and comfort, and to this end goes daily to his office and slaves under a more cruel taskmaster than the meanest of the workmen in his pay; he decides to retire, and finds that life in empty. The end has been swallowed up in the means.

Only those are happy who have desired the unattainable.

All possessions, the material and the spiritual alike, are but dust.

Love, sorrow, and compassion are three sisters who, if they seem freed from this curse, are only so because of their relation to The Unsatisfied.

Beauty is itself so unattainable that it escapes altogether; and the true artist, like the true mystic, can never rest. To him the Magician is but a servant. His wand is of infinite length; it is the creative Mahalingam.

The difficulty with such an one is naturally that his wand being very thin in proportion to its length is liable to wobble. Very few artists are conscious of their real purpose, and in very many cases we have this infinite yearning supported by so frail a constitution that nothing is achieved.

The Magician must build all that he has into his pyramid; and if that pyramid is to touch the stars, how broad must be the base! There is no knowledge and no power which is useless to the Magician. One might almost say there is no scrap of material in the whole Universe with which he can dispense. His ultimate enemy is the great Magician, the Magician who created the whole illusion of the Universe; and to meet him in battle, so that nothing is left either of him or of yourself, you must be exactly equal to him.

At the same time let the Magician never forget that every brick must tend to the summit of the pyramid -- the sides must be perfectly smooth; there must be no false summits, even in the lowest layers.

This is the practical and active form of that obligation of a Master of the Temple in which it is said: "I will interpret every phenomenon as a particular dealing of God with my soul."

In Liber CLXXV many practical devices for attaining this one-pointedness are given, and though the subject of that book is devotion to a particular Deity, its instructions may be easily generalized to suit the development of any form of will.

This will is then the active form of understanding. The Master of the Temple asks, on seeing a slug: "What is the purpose of this message from the Unseen? How shall I interpret this Word of God Most High?" The Magus thinks: "How shall I use this slug?" And in this course he must persist. Though many things useless, so far as he can see, are sent to him, one day he will find the one thing he needs, while his Understanding will appreciate the fact that none of those other things were useless.

So with these early practices of renunciation it will now be clearly understood that they were but of temporary use. They were only of value as training. The adept will laugh over his early absurdities -- the disproportions will have been harmonized; and the structure of his soul will be seen as perfectly organic, with no one thing out of its place. He will see himself as the positive Tau with its ten complete squares within the triangle of the negatives; and this figure will become one, as soon as from the equilibrium of opposites he has attained to the identity of opposites.

In all this is will have been seen that the most powerful weapon in the hand of the student is the Vow of Holy Obedience; and many will wish that they had the opportunity of putting themselves under a holy Guru. Let them take heart -- for any being capable of giving commands is an efficient Guru for the purpose of this Vow, provided that he is not too amiable and lazy.

The only reason for choosing a Guru who has himself attained is that he will aid the vigilance of the sleepy Chela, and, while tempering the Wind to that shorn lamb, will carefully harden him, and at the same time gladden his ears with holy discourse. But if such a person is inaccessible, let him choose any one with whom he has constant intercourse, explain the circumstances, and ask him to act.

The person should if possible be trustworthy; and let the Chela remember that if he should be ordered to jump over a cliff it is very much better to do it than to give up the practice.

And it is of the very greatest importance not to limit the vow in any way. You must buy the egg without haggling.

In a certain Society the members were bound to do certain things, being assured that there was "nothing in the vow contrary to their civil, moral, or religious obligations." So when any one wanted to break his vow he had no difficulty in discovering a very good reason for it. The vow lost all its force.

    WEH footnote: Crowley expressly cites this clause in the Golden Dawn initiations as the third defense for his publishing the Golden Dawn rituals. See Equinox I, 4, page 5, "Editorial".

When Buddha took his seat under the blessed Bo-Tree, he took an oath that none of the inhabitants of the 10,000 worlds should cause him to rise until he had attained; so that when even Mara the great Arch-Devil, with his three daughters the arch-temptresses appeared, he remained still.

Now it is useless for the beginner to take so formidable a vow; he has not yet attained the strength which can defy Mara. Let him estimate his strength, and take a vow which is within it, but only just within it. Thus Milo began by carrying a new-born calf; and day by day as it grew into a bull, his strength was found sufficient.

Again let it be said that Liber III is a most admirable method for the beginner,

    footnote: This book must be carefully read. Its essence is that the pupil swears to refrain from a certain thought, word, or deed; and on each breach of the oath, cuts his arm sharply with a razor. This is better than flagellation because it can be done in public, without attracting notice. It however forms one of the most hilariously exciting parlour games for the family circle ever invented. Friends and relations are always ready to do their utmost to trap you into doing the forbidden thing.

and it will be best, even if he is very confident in his strength, to take the vow for very short periods, beginning with an hour and increasing daily by half-hours until the day is filled. Then let him rest awhile, and attempt a two-day practice; and so on until he is perfect.

He should also begin with the very easiest practices. But the thing which he is sworn to avoid should not be a thing which normally he would do infrequently; because the strain on the memory which subserves his vigilance would be very great, and the practice become difficult. It is just as well at first that the pain of his arm should be there "at the time when he would normally do the forbidden thing," to warn him against its repetition.

There will thus be a clear connection in his mind of cause and effect, until he will be just as careful in avoiding this particular act which he has consciously determined, as in those other things which in childhood he has been trained to avoid.

Just as the eyelid unconsciously closes when the eye is threatened,

    footnote: If it were not so there would be very few people in the world who were not blind.

so must he build up in consciousness this power of inhibition until it sinks below consciousness, adding to his store of automatic force, so that he is free to devote his conscious energy to a yet higher task.

It is impossible to overrate the value of this inhibition to the man when he comes to meditate. He has guarded his mind against thoughts A, B, and C; he has told the sentries to allow no one to pass who is not in uniform. And it will be very easy for him to extend that power, and to lower the portcullis.

Let him remember, too that there is a difference not only in the frequency of thoughts -- but in their intensity.

The worst of all is of course the ego, which is almost omnipresent and almost irresistible, although so deeply-seated that in normal thought one may not always be aware of it.

Buddha, taking the bull by the horns, made this idea the first to be attacked.

Each must decide for himself whether this is a wise course to pursue. But it certainly seems easier to strip off first the things which can easily be done without.

    WEH footnote: Among those who might find the ego an unwise first choice to attack are those who confuse it with a sense of private property. Many petty thieves use denial of the ego as an excuse. Three book-thieves and any number of shop-lifters come to mind.

The majority of people will find most trouble with the Emotions, and thoughts which excite them.

But is is both possible and necessary not merely to suppress the emotions, but to turn them into faithful servants. Thus the emotion of anger is occasionally useful against that portion of the brain whose slackness vitiates the control.

If there is one emotion which is never useful, it is pride; for this reason, that it is bound up entirely with the Ego...

No, there is no use for pride!

The destruction of the Perceptions, either the grosser or the subtler, appears much easier, because the mind not being moved, is free to remember its control.

It is easy to be so absorbed in a book that one takes no notice of the most beautiful scenery. But if stung by a wasp the book is immediately forgotten.

The Tendencies are, however, much harder to combat than the three lower Shandhas put together -- for the simple reason that they are for the most part below consciousness, and must be, as it were, awakened in order to be destroyed, so that the will of the Magician is in a sense trying to do two opposite things at the same time.

Consciousness itself is only destroyed by Samadhi.

One can now see the logical process which begins in refusing to think of a foot, and ends by destroying the sense of individuality.

Of the methods of destroying various deep-rooted ideas there are many.

The best is perhaps the method of equilibrium. Get the mind into the habit of calling up the opposite to every thought that may arise. In conversation always disagree. See the other man's arguments; but, however much your judgment approves them, find the answer.

Let this be done dispassionately; the more convinced you are that a certain point of view is right, the more determined you should be to find proofs that it is wrong.

If you have done this thoroughly, these points of view will cease to trouble you; you can then assert your own point of view with the calm of a master, which is more convincing than the enthusiasm of a learner.

You will cease to be interested in controversies; politics, ethics, religion will seem so many toys, and your Magical Will will be free from these inhibitions.

In Burma there is only one animal which the people will kill, Russell's Viper; because, as they say, "either you must kill it or it will kill you"; and it is a question of which sees the other first.

Now any one idea which is not The Idea must be treated in this fashion. When you have killed the snake you can use its skin, but as long as it is alive and free, you are in danger.

And unfortunately the ego-idea, which is the real snake, can throw itself into a multitude of forms, each clothed in the most brilliant dress. Thus the devil is said to be able to disguise himself as an angel of light.

Under the strain of a magical vow this is too terribly the case. No normal human being understands or can understand the temptations of the saints.

An ordinary person with ideas like those which obsessed St. Patrick and St. Antony would be only fit for an asylum.

The tighter you hold the snake (which was previously asleep in the sun, and harmless enough, to all appearance), the more it struggles; and it is important to remember that your hold must tighten correspondingly, or it will escape and bite you.

Just as if you tell a child not to do a thing -- no matter what -- it will immediately want to do it, thought otherwise the idea might never have entered its head, so it is with the saint. We have all of us these tendencies latent in us; of most of them we might remain unconscious all our lives -- unless they were awakened by our Magick. They lie in ambush. And every one must be awakened, and every one must be destroyed. Every one who signs the oath of a Probationer is stirring up a hornets' nest.

A man has only to affirm his conscious aspiration; and the enemy is upon him.

It seems hardly possible that any one can ever pass through that terrible year of probation -- and yet the aspirant is not bound to anything difficult; it almost seems as if he were not bound to anything at all -- and yet experience teaches us that the effect is like plucking a man from his fireside into mid-Atlantic in a gale. The truth is, it may be, that the very simplicity of the task makes it difficult.

The Probationer must cling to his aspiration -- affirm it again and again in desperation.

He has, perhaps, almost lost sight of it; it has become meaningless to him; he repeats it mechanically as he is tossed from wave to wave.

But if he can stick to it he will come through.

And, once he "is" through, things will again assume their proper aspect; he will see that mere illusion were the things that seemed so real, and he will be fortified against the new trials that await him.

But the unfortunate indeed is he who cannot thus endure. It is useless for him to say, "I don't like the Atlantic; I will go back to the fireside."

Once take one step on the path, and there is no return. You will remember in Browning's "Childe Roland to the dark Tower came":

For mark! no sooner was I fairly found

Pledged to the plain, after a pace or two,

Than, pausing to throw backwards a last view

O'er the safe road, 'twas gone: grey plain all round,

Nothing but plain to the horizon's bound.

I might go on; naught else remained to do.

And this is universally true. The statement that the Probationer can resign when he chooses is in truth only for those who have taken the oath but superficially.

A real Magical Oath cannot be broken: you think it can, but it can't.

This is the advantage of a real Magical Oath.

However far you go around, you arrive at the end just the same, and all you have done by attempting to break your oath is to involve yourself in the most frightful trouble.

It cannot be too clearly understood that such is the nature of things: it does not depend upon the will of any persons, however powerful or exalted; nor can Their force, the force of Their great oaths, avail against the weakest oath of the most trivial of beginners.

The attempt to interfere with the Magical Will of another person would be wicked, if it were not absurd.

One may attempt to build up a Will when {sic} before nothing existed but a chaos of whims; but once organization has taken place it is sacred. As Blake says: "Everything that lives is holy"; and hence the creation of life is the most sacred of tasks. It does not matter very much to the creator what it is that he creates; there is room in the universe for both the spider and the fly.

It is from the rubbish-heap of Choronzon that one selects the material for a god!

This is the ultimate analysis of the Mystery of Redemption, and is possibly the real reason of the existence (if existence it can be called) of form, or, if you like, of the Ego.

It is astonishing that this typical cry -- "I am I" -- is the cry of that which above all is not I.

It was that Master whose Will was so powerful that at its lightest expression the deaf heard, and the dumb spake, lepers were cleansed and the dead arose to life, that Master and no other who at the supreme moment of his agony could cry, "Not my Will, but Thine, be done."

CHAPTER VII
THE CUP

AS the Magick Wand is the Will, the Wisdom, the Word of the Magician, so is the Magick Cup his Understanding.

This is the cup of which it was written: "Father, if it be Thy Will, let this cup pass from Me!" And again: "Can ye drink of the cup that I drink of?"

And it is also the cup in the hand of OUR LADY BABALON, and the cup of the Sacrament.

This Cup is full of bitterness, and of blood, and of intoxication.

The Understanding of the Magus is his link with the Invisible, on the passive side.

His Will errs actively by opposing itself to the Universal Will.

His Understanding errs passively when it receives influence from that which is not the ultimate truth.

In the beginning the Cup of the student is almost empty; and even such truth as he receives may leak away, and be lost.

They say that the Venetians made glasses which changed colour if poison was put into them; of such a glass must the student make his Cup.

Very little experience on the mystic path will show him that of all the impressions he receives none is true. Either they are false in themselves, or they are wrongly interpreted in his mind.

There is one truth, and only one. All other thoughts are false.

And as he advances in the knowledge of his mind he will come to understand that its whole structure is so faulty that it is quite incapable, even in its most exalted moods, of truth.

He will recognize that any thought merely establishes a relation between the Ego and the non-Ego.

Kant has shown that even the laws of nature are but the conditions of thought. And as the current of thought is the blood of the mind, it is said that the Magick Cup is filled with the blood of the Saints. All thought must be offered up as a sacrifice.

The Cup can hardly be described as a weapon. It is round like the pantacle -- not straight like the wand and the dagger. Reception, not projection, is its nature.

    footnote: As the Magician is in the position of God towards the Spirit that he evokes, he stands in the Circle, and the spirit in the Triangle; so the Magician is in the Triangle with respect to his own God.

So that which is round is to him a symbol of the influence from the higher. This circle symbolizes the Infinite, as every cross or Tau represents the Finite. That which is four square shows the Finite fixed into itself; for this reason the altar is foursquare. It is the solid basis from which all the operation proceeds. One form

    footnote: An ugly form. A better is given in the illustration.

of the magical cup has a sphere beneath the bowl, and is supported upon a conical base.

This cup (crescent, sphere, cone) represents the three principles of the Moon, the Sun, and Fire, the three principles which, according to the Hindus, have course in the body.

    footnote: These "principles" are seen by the pupil when first he succeeds in stilling his mind. That one which happens to be in course at the moment is the one seen by him. This is so marvellous an experience, even for one who has pushed astral visions to a very high point, that he may mistake them for the End. See chapter on Dhyana.

    The Hebrew letters corresponding to these principles are Gimel, Resh, and Shin, and the word formed by them means "a flower" and also "expelled," "cast forth."

This is the Cup of Purification; as Zoroaster says:

"So therefore first the priest who governeth the works of fire must sprinkle with the lustral water of the loud-resounding sea."

It is the sea that purifies the world. And the "Great Sea" is in the Qabalah a name of Binah, "Understanding."

It is by the Understanding of the Magus that his work is purified.

Binah, moreover, is the Moon, and the bowl of this cup is shaped like the moon.

This moon is the path of Gimel through which the influence from the Crown descends upon the Sun of Tiphereth.

And this is based upon the pyramid of fire which symbolizes the aspiration of the student.

In Hindu symbolism the Amrita or "dew of immortality"

    footnote: A--, the privative particle; "mrita," mortal.

drips constantly upon a man, but is burnt up by the gross fire of his appetites. Yogis attempt to catch and so preserve this dew by turning back the tongue in the mouth.

Concerning the water in this Cup, it may be said that just as the wand should be perfectly rigid, the ideal solid, so should the water be the ideal fluid.

The Wand is erect, and must extend to Infinity.

The surface of the water is flat, and must extend to Infinity.

One is the line, the other the plane.

But as the Wand is weak without breadth, so is the water false without depth. The Understanding of the Magus must include all things, and that understanding must be infinitely profound.

H. G. Wells has said that "every word of which a man is ignorant represents an idea of which he is ignorant." And it is impossible perfectly to understand all things unless all things be first known.

Understanding is the structuralization of knowledge.

All impressions are disconnected, as the Babe of the Abyss is so terribly aware; and the Master of the Temple must sit for 106 seasons in the City of the Pyramids because this coordination is a tremendous task.

There is nothing particularly occult in this doctrine concerning knowledge and understanding.

A looking-glass receives all impressions but coordinates none.

The savage has none but the most simple associations of ideas.

Even the ordinary civilized man goes very little further.

All advance in thought is made by collecting the greatest possible number of facts, classifying them, and grouping them.

The philologist, though perhaps he only speaks one language, has a much higher type of mind than the linguist who speaks twenty.

This Tree of Thought is exactly paralleled by the tree of nervous structure.

Very many people go about nowadays who are exceedingly "well-informed," but who have not the slightest idea of the meaning of the facts they know. They have not developed the necessary higher part of the brain. Induction is impossible to them.

This capacity for storing away facts is compatible with actual imbecility. Some imbeciles have been able to store their memories with more knowledge than perhaps any sane man could hope to acquire.

This is the great fault of modern education -- a child is stuffed with facts, and no attempt is made to explain their connection and bearing. The result is that even the facts themselves are soon forgotten.

Any first-rate mind is insulted and irritated by such treatment, and any first-rate memory is in danger of being spoilt by it.

No two ideas have any real meaning until they are harmonized in a third, and the operation is only perfect when these ideas are contradictory. This is the essence of the Hegelian logic.

The Magick Cup, as was shown above, is also the flower. It is the lotus which opens to the sun, and which collects the dew.

This Lotus is in the hand of Isis the great Mother. It is a symbol similar to the Cup in the hand of OUR LADY BABALON.

There are also the Lotuses in the human body, according to the Hindu system of Physiology referred to in the chapter on Dharana.

    footnote: These Lotuses are all situated in the spinal column, which has three channels, Sushumna in the middle, Ida and Pingala on either side ("cf." the Tree of Life). The central channel is compressed at the base by Kundalini, the magical power, a sleeping serpent. Awake her: she darts up the spine, and the Prana flows through the Sushumna. See "Raja-Yoga" for more details.

There is the lotus of three petals in the Sacrum, in which the Kundalini lies asleep. This lotus is the receptacle of reproductive force.

There is also the six-petalled lotus opposite the navel -- which receives the forces which nourish the body.

There is also a lotus in the Solar plexus which receives the nervous forces.

The six-petalled lotus in the heart corresponds to Tiphereth, and receives those vital forces which are connected with the blood.

The sixteen-petalled lotus opposite the larynx receives the nourishment needed by the breath.

The two-petalled lotus of the pineal gland receives the nourishment needed by thought, while above the junction of the cranial structures is that sublime lotus, of a thousand and one petals, which receives the influence from on high; and in which, in the Adept, the awakened Kundalini takes her pleasure with the Lord of All.

All these lotuses are figured by the Magick Cup.

In man they are but partly opened, or only opened to their natural nourishment. In fact it is better to think of them as closed, as secreting that nourishment, which, because of the lack of sun, turns to poison.

The Magick Cup must have no lid, yet it must be kept veiled most carefully at all times, except when invocation of the Highest is being made.

This cup must also be hidden from the profane. The Wand must be kept secret lest the profane, fearing it, should succeed in breaking it; the Cup lest, wishing to touch it, they should defile it.

Yet the Sprinkling of its water not only purifies the Temple, but blesseth them that are without: freely must it be poured! But let no one know your real purpose, and let no one know the secret of your strength. Remember Samson! Remember Guy Fawkes!

Of the methods of increasing Understanding those of the Holy Qabalah are perhaps the best, provided that the intellect is thoroughly awake to their absurdity, and never allows itself to be convinced.

    footnote: See the "Interlude" following.

Further meditation of certain sorts is useful: not the strict meditation which endeavours to still the mind, but such a meditation as Samasati.

    footnote: See Equinox V, "The Training of the Mind"; Equinox II, "The Psychology of Hashish": Equinox VII, "Liber DCCCCXIII."

On the exoteric side if necessary the mind should be trained by the study of any well-developed science, such as chemistry, or mathematics.

The idea of organization is the first step, that of interpretation the second. The Master of the Temple, whose grade corresponds to Binah, is sworn to "interpret every phenomenon as a particular dealing of God with his soul."

But even the beginner may attempt this practice with advantage.

Either a fact fits in or it does not; if it does not, harmony is broken; and as the Universal harmony cannot be broken, the discord must be in the mind of the student, thus showing that he is not in tune with that Universal choir.

Let him then puzzle out first the great facts, then the little; until one summer, when he is bald and lethargic after lunch, he understands and appreciates the existence of flies!

This lack of Understanding with which we all begin is so terrible, so pitiful. In this world there is so much cruelty, so much waste, so much stupidity.

The contemplation of the Universe must be at first almost pure anguish. It is this fact which is responsible for most of the speculations of philosophy.

Mediaeval philosophers when hopelessly astray because their theology necessitated the reference of all things to the standard of men's welfare.

They even became stupid: Bernardin de St. Pierre (was it not?) said that the goodness of God was such that wherever men had built a great city, He had placed a river to assist them in conveying merchandise. But the truth is that in no way can we imagine the Universe as devised. If horses were made for men to ride, were not men made for worms to eat?

And so we find once more that the Ego-idea must be ruthlessly rooted out before Understanding can be attained.

There is an apparent contradiction between this attitude and that of the Master of the Temple. What can possibly be more selfish than this interpretation of everything as the dealing of God with the soul?

But it is God who is all and not any part; and every "dealing" must thus be an expansion of the soul, a destruction of its separateness.

Every ray of the sun expands the flower.

The surface of the water in the Magick Cup is infinite; there is no point different from any other point.

    footnote: "If ye confound the space-marks, saying: They are one; or saying, They are many ... then expect the direful judgments of Ra Hoor Khuit ... {{sic: error of capitalization, should be: "if ye confound the space-marks ..."}}

This shall regenerate the world, the little world my sister." These are the words of NUIT, Our Lady of the Stars, of whom Binah is but the troubled reflection.}

Thus, ultimately, as the wand is a binding and a limitation, so is the Cup an expansion -- into the Infinite.

And this is the danger of the Cup; it must necessarily be open to all, and yet if anything is put into it which is out of proportion, unbalanced, or impure, it takes hurt.

And here again we find difficulty with our thoughts. The grossness and stupidity of "simple impressions" cloud the waters; "emotions" trouble it; "perceptions" are still far from the perfect purity of truth; they cause reflections; while the "tendencies" alter the refractive index, and break up the light. Even "consciousness" itself is that which distinguishes between the lower and the higher, the waters which are below the firmament from the waters which are above the firmament, that appalling stage in the great curse of creation.

Since at the best this water

    footnote: The water in this Cup (the latter is also a heart, as shown by the transition from the ancient to the modern Tarot; the suit "Hearts" in old packs of cards, and even in modern Spanish and Italian cards, is called "Cups") is the letter "Mem" (the Hebrew word for water), which has for its Tarot trump the Hanged Man. This Hanged Man represents the Adept hanging by one heel from a gallows, which is in the shape of the letter Daleth -- the letter of the Empress, the heavenly Venus in the Tarot. His legs form a cross, his arms a triangle, as if by his equilibrium and self-sacrifice he were bringing the light down and establishing it even in the abyss.

    Elementary as this is, it is a very satisfactory hieroglyph of the Great Work, though the student is warned that the obvious sentimental interpretation will have to be discarded as soon as it has been understood. It is a very noble illusion, and therefore a very dangerous one, to figure one's self as the Redeemer. For, of all the illusions in this Cup -- the subtler and purer they are, the more difficult they are to detect.

is but a reflection, how tremendously important it becomes that it should be still!

If the cup is shaken the light will be broken up.

Therefore the Cup is placed upon the Altar, which is foursquare, will multiplied by will, the confirmation of the will in the Magical Oath, its fixation in Law.

It is easy to see when water is muddy, and easy to get rid of the mud; but there are many impurities which defy everything but distillation and even some which must be fractionated unto 70 times 7.

There is, however, a universal solvent and harmonizer, a certain dew which is so pure that a single drop of it cast into the water of the Cup will for the time being bring all to perfection.

This dew is called Love. Even as in the case of human love, the whole Universe appears perfect to the man who is under its control, so is it, and much more, with the Divine Love of which it is now spoken.

For human love is an excitement, and not a stilling, of the mind; and as it is bound to the individual, only leads to greater trouble in the end.

This Divine Love, on the contrary, is attached to no symbol.

It abhors limitation, either in its intensity or its scope. And this is the dew of the stars of which it is spoken in the Holy Books, for NUIT the Lady of the Stars is called "the Continuous One of Heaven," and it is that Dew which bathes the body of the Adept "in a sweet-smelling perfume of sweat."

    footnote: See Liber Legis. Equinox VII. {{SIC to the quote, correctly: ".. bathing his whole body in a sweet-smelling perfume of sweat: O Nuit, continuous one of Heaven, let ...

In this cup, therefore, though all things are placed, by virtue of this dew all lose their identity. And therefore this Cup is in the hand of BABALON, the Lady of the City of the Pyramids, wherein no one can be distinguished from any other, wherein no one may sit until he has lost his name.

Of that which is in the Cup it is also said that it is wine. This is the Cup of Intoxication. Intoxication means poisoning, and in particular refers to the poison in which arrows are dipped (Greek

    WEH: here in Greek letters: tau-omicron-xi-omicron-nu

, "a bow"). Think of the Vision of the Arrow in Liber 418, and look at the passages in the Holy Books which speak of the action of the spirit under the figure of a deadly poison.

For to each individual thing attainment means first and foremost the destruction of the individuality.

Each of our ideas must be made to give up the Self to the Beloved, so that we may eventually give up the Self to the Beloved in our turn.

It will be remembered in the History Lection

    footnote: Liber LXI, the book given to those who wish to become Probationers of A.'.A.'.

how the Adepts "who had with smiling faces abandoned their homes and their possessions -- could with steady calm and firm correctness abandon the Great Work itself; for this is the last and greatest projection of the Alchemist."

The Master of the Temple has crossed the Abyss, has entered the Palace of the King's Daughter; he has only to utter one word, and all is dissolved. But, instead of that, he is found hidden in the earth, tending a garden.

This mystery is all too complex to be elucidated in these fragments of impure thought; it is a suitable subject for meditation.

An Interlude
Every nursery rime contains profound magical secrets which are open to every one who has made a study of the correspondences of the Holy Qabalah. To puzzle out an imaginary meaning for this "nonsense" sets one thinking of the Mysteries; one enters into deep contemplation of holy things and God Himself leads the soul to a real illumination. Hence also the necessity of Incarnation; the soul must descend into all falsity in order to attain All-Truth.

For instance:

Old Mother Hubbard
Went to her cupboard
To get her poor dog a bone;
When she got there,
The cupboard was bare,
And so the poor dog had none.

Who is this ancient and venerable mother of whom it is spoken? Verily she is none other than Binah, as is evident in the use of the holy letter H with which her name begins.

Nor is she the sterile Mother Ama-but the fertile Aima; for within her she bears Vau, the son, for the second letter of her name, and R, the penultimate, is the Sun, Tiphareth, the Son.

The other three letters of her name, B, A, and D, are the three paths which join the three supernals.

To what cupboard did she go? Even to the most secret caverns of the Universe. And who is this dog? Is it not the name of God spelt Qabalistically backwards? And what is this bone? The bone is the Wand, the holy Lingam!

The complete interpretation of the rune is now open. This rime is the legend of the murder of Osiris by Typhon.

The limbs of Osiris were scattered in the Nile.

Isis sought them in every corner of the Universe, and she found all except his sacred lingam, which was not found until quite recently (vide Fuller, The Star in the West).

Let us take another example from this rich storehouse of magick lore.

Little Bo Peep
She lost her sheep,
And couldn't tell where to find them.
Leave them alone!
And they'll come home,
Dragging their tails behind them.

"Bo" is the root meaning Light, from which spring such words as Bo-Tree, Bodhisattva, and Buddha.

And "Peep" is Apep, the serpent Apophis. This poem therefore contains the same symbol as that in the Egyptian and Hebrew Bibles.

The snake is the serpent of initiation, as the Lamb is the Saviour.

This ancient one, the Wisdom of Eternity, sits in its old anguish awaiting the Redeemer. And this holy verse triumphantly assures us that there is no need for anxiety. The Saviours will come one after the other, at their own good pleasure, and as they may be needed, and drag their tails, that is to say those who follow out their holy commandment, to the ultimate goal.

Again we read:

Little Miss Muffett
Sat on a tuffet,
Eating of curds and whey,
Up came a big spider,
And sat down beside her,
And frightened Miss Muffett away.

Little Miss Muffett unquestionably represents Malkah; for she is unmarried. She is seated upon a "tuffet"; id est, she is the unregenerate soul upon Tophet, the pit of hell. And she eats curds and whey, that is, not the pure milk of the mother, but milk which has undergone decomposition.

But who is the spider? Verily herein is a venerable arcanum connoted! Like all insects, the spider represents a demon. But why a spider? Who is this spider "who taketh hold with her hands, and is in King's Palaces"? The name of this spider is Death. It is the fear of death which first makes the soul aware of its forlorn condition.

It would be interesting if tradition had preserved for us Miss Muffett's subsequent adventures.

But we must proceed to consider the interpretation of the following rime:

Little Jack Horner
Sat in a corner,
Eating a Christmas pie.
He stuck in his thumb,
And pulled out a plum,
And said, "What a good boy am I!"

In the interpretation of this remarkable poem there is a difference between two great schools of Adepts.

One holds that Jack is merely a corruption of John, Ion, he who goes-Hermes, the Messenger. The other prefers to take Jack simply and reverently as Iacchus, the spiritual form of Bacchus. But it does not matter very much whether we insist upon the swiftness or the rapture of the Holy Spirit of God; and that it is he of whom it is here spoken is evident, for the name Horner could be applied to none other by even the most casual reader of the Holy Gospels and the works of Congreve. And the context makes this even clearer, for he sits in a corner, that is in the place of Christ, the Corner Stone, eating, that is, enjoying, that which the birth of Christ assures to us. He is the Comforter who replaces the absent Saviour. If there was still any doubt of His identity it would be cleared up by the fact that it is the thumb, which is attributed to the element of Spirit, and not one of the four fingers of the four lesser elements, which he sticks into the pie of the new dispensation. He plucks forth one who is ripe, no doubt to send him forth as a teacher into the world, and rejoices that he is so well carrying out the will of the Father.

Let us pass from this most blessed subject to yet another.

Tom, Tom, the piper's son,
Stole a pig and away he run.
The pig was eat,
And Tom was beat,
And Tom went roaring down the street.

This is one of the more exoteric of these rimes. In fact, it is not much better than a sun-myth. Tom is Toum, the God of the Sunset (called the Son of Apollo, the Piper, the maker of music). The only difficulty in the poem concerns the pig; for anyone who has watched an angry sunset in the Tropics upon the sea, will recognize how incomparable a description of that sunset is given in that wonderful last line. Some have thought that the pig refers to the evening sacrifice, others that she is Hathor, the Lady of the West, in her more sensual aspect.

But it is probable that this poem is only the frst stanza of an epic. It has all the characteristic marks. Someone said of the Iliad that it did not finish, but merely stopped. This is the same. We may be sure that there is more of this poem. It tells us too much and too little. How came this tragedy of the eating of a merely stolen pig? Unveil this mystery of who "eat" it!

It must be abandoned, then, as at least partially insoluble. Let us consider this poem:

Hickory, dickory, dock!
The mouse ran up the clock;
The clock struck one,
And the mouse ran down,
Hickory, dickory, dock!

Here we are on higher ground at once. The clock symbolizes the spinal column, or, if you prefer it, Time, chosen as one of the conditions of normal consciousness. The mouse is the Ego; "Mus," a mouse, being only Sum, "I am," spelt Qabalistically backwards.

This Ego or Prana or Kundalini force being driven up the spine, the clock strikes one, that is, the duality of consciousness is abolished. And the force again subsides to its original level.

"Hickory, dickory, dock!" is perhaps the mantra which was used by the adept who constructed this rime, thereby hoping to fix it in the minds of men; so that they might attain to Samadhi by the same method. Others attribute to it a more profound signifance-which it is impossible to go into at this moment, for we must turn to:-

Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall;
Humpty Dumpty got a great fall;
All the king's horses
And all the king's men
Couldn't set up Humpty Dumpty again.

This is so simple as hardly to require explanation. Humpty Dumpty is of course the Egg of Spirit, and the wall is the Abyss--his "fall" is therefore the descent of spirit into matter; and it is only too painfully familiar to us that all the king's horses and all his men cannot restore us to the height.

Only The King Himself can do that!

But one can hardly comment upon a theme which has been so fruitfully treated by Ludovicus Carolus, that most holy illuminated man of God. His masterly treatment of the identity of the three reciprocating paths of Daleth, Teth, and Pe, is one of the most wonderful passages in the Holy Qabalah. His resolution of what we take to be the bond of slavery into very love, the embroidered neckband of honour bestowed upon us by the King himself, is one of the most sublime passages in this class of literature.

Peter, Peter, pumpkin eater,
Had a wife and couldn't keep her.
He put her in a peanut shell;
Then he kept her very well.

This early authentic text of the Hinayana School of Buddhism is much esteemed even to-day by the more cultured and devoted followers of that school.

The pumpkin is of course the symbol of resurrection, as is familiar to all students of the story of Jonah and the gourd.

Peter is therefore the Arahat who has put an end to his series of resurrections. That he is called Peter is a reference to the symbolizing of Arahats as stones in the great wall of the guardians of mankind. His wife is of course (by the usual symbolism) his body, which he could not keep until he put her in a peanut shell, the yellow robe of a Bhikkhu.

Buddha said that if any man became an Arahat he must either take the vows of a Bhikkhu that very day, or die, and it is this saying of Buddha's that the unknown poet wished to commemorate.

Taffy was a Welshman
Taffy was a thief;
Taffy came to my house
And stole a leg of beef.
I went to Taffy's house;
Taffy was in bed.
I took a carving knife,
And cut off Taffy's head.

Taffy is merely short for Taphthatharath, the Spirit of Mercury and the God of Welshmen or thieves. "My house" is of course equivalent to "my magick circle." Note that Beth, the letter of Mercury and "The Magus," means "a house."

The beef is a symbol of the Bull, Apis the Redeemer. This is therefore that which is written, "Oh my God, disguise thy glory! Come as a thief, and let us steal away the sacraments!"

In the following verse we find that Taffy is "in bed," owing to the operation of the sacrament. The great task of the Alchemist has been accomplished; the mercury is fixed.

One can then take the Holy Dagger, and separate the Caput Mortuum from the Elixir. Some Alchemists believe that the beef represents that dense physical substance which is imbibed by Mercury for his fixation; but here as always we should prefer the more spiritual interpretation.

Bye, Baby Bunting!
Daddy's gone a-hunting.
He's gone to get a rabbit-skin
To wrap my Baby Bunting in.

This is mystical charge to the new-born soul to keep still, to remain steadfast in meditation; for, in Bye, Beth is the letter of thought, Yod that of the Hermit. It tells the soul that the Father of All will clothe him about with His own majestical silence. For is not the rabbit he "who lay low and said nuffin'"?

Pat-a-cake, pat-a-cake, baker's man!
Bake me a cake as fast as you can!
Pat it and prick it and mark it with P!
Bake it in the oven for baby and me!

This rime is usually accompanied (even to-day in the nursery) with a ceremonial clapping of hands-the symbol of Samadhi. Compare what is said on this subject in our comment on the famous "Advent" passage in Thessalonians.

The cake is of course the bread of the sacrament, and it would ill become Frater P. to comment upon the third line-though it may be remarked that even among the Catholics the wafer has always been marked with a phallus or cross.

CHAPTER VIII
THE SWORD

"THE word of the Lord is quick and powerful, and sharper than a two-edged sword."

As the Wand is Chokmah, the Will, "the Father," and the Cup the Understanding, "the Mother," Binah; so the Magick Sword is the Reason, "the Son," the six Sephiroth of the Ruach, and we shall see that the Pantacle corresponds to Malkuth, "the Daughter."

The Magick Sword is the analytical faculty; directed against any demon it attacks his complexity.

Only the simple can withstand the sword. As we are below the Abyss, this weapon is then entirely destructive: it divides Satan against Satan. It is only in the lower forms of Magick, the purely human forms, that the Sword has become so important a weapon. A dagger should be sufficient.

But the mind of man is normally so important to him that the sword is actually the largest of his weapons; happy is he who can make the dagger suffice!

The hilt of the Sword should be made of copper.

The guard is composed of the two crescents of the waxing and the waning moon -- back to back. Spheres are placed between them, forming an equilateral triangle with the sphere of the pommel.

The blade is straight, pointed, and sharp right up to the guard. It is made of steel, to equilibrate with the hilt, for steel is the metal of Mars, as copper is of Venus.

Those two planets are male and female -- and thus reflect the Wand and the Cup, though in a much lower sense.

The hilt is of Venus, for Love is the motive of this ruthless analysis -- if this were not so the sword would be a Black Magical weapon.

The pommel of the Sword is in Daath, the guard extends to Chesed and Geburah; the point is in Malkuth. Some magi make the three spheres of lead, tin, and gold respectively; the moons are silver, and the grip contains quicksilver, thus making the Sword symbolic of the seven planets. But this is a phantasy and affectation.

"Whoso taketh the sword shall perish by the sword," is not a mystical threat, but a mystical promise. It is our own complexity that must be destroyed.

Here is another parable. Peter, the Stone of the Philosophers, cuts off the ear of Malchus, the servant of the High Priest (the ear is the organ of Spirit). In analysis the spiritual part of Malkuth must be separated from it by the philosophical stone, and then Christus, the Anointed One, makes it whole once more. "Solve et coagula!"

It is noticeable that this takes place at the arrest of Christ, who is the son, the Ruach, immediately before his crucifixion.

The Calvary Cross should be of six squares, an unfolded cube, which cube is this same philosophical stone.

Meditation will reveal many mysteries which are concealed in this symbol.

The Sword or Dagger is attributed to air, all-wandering, all-penetrating, but unstable; not a phenomenon subtle like fire, not a chemical combination like water, but a mixture of gases.

    footnote: The Oxygen in the air would be too fierce for life; it must be largely diluted with the inert nitrogen.

    The rational mind supports life, but about seventy-nine per cent. of it not only refuses itself to enter into combination, but prevents the remaining twenty-one per cent. from doing so. Enthusiasms are checked; the intellect is the great enemy of devotion. One of the tasks of the Magician is to manage somehow to separate the Oxygen and Nitrogen in his mind, to stifle four-fifts so that he may burn up the remainder, a flame of holiness. But this cannot be done by the Sword.

The Sword, necessary as it is to the Beginner, is but a crude weapon. Its function is to keep off the enemy or to force a passage through them -- and though it must be wielded to gain admission to the palace, it cannot be worn at the marriage feast.

One might say that the Pantacle is the bread of life, and the Sword the knife which cuts it up. One must have ideas, but one must criticize them.

The Sword, too, is that weapon with which one strikes terror into the demons and dominates them. One must keep the Ego Lord of the impressions. One must not allow the circle to be broken by the demon; one must not allow any one idea to carry one away.

It will readily be seen how very elementary and false all this is -- but for the beginner it is necessary.

In all dealings with demons the point of the Sword is kept downwards, and it should not be used for invocation, as is taught in certain schools of magick.

If the Sword is raised towards the Crown, it is no longer really a sword. The Crown cannot be divided. Certainly the Sword should not be lifted.

The Sword may, however, be clasped in both hands, and kept steady and erect, symbolizing that thought has become one with the single aspiration, and burnt up like a flame. This flame is the Shin, the Ruach Alhim, not the mere Ruach Adam. The divine and not the human consciousness.

The Magician cannot wield the Sword unless the Crown is on his head.

Those Magicians, who have attempted to make the Sword the sole or even the principal weapon, have only destroyed themselves, not by the destruction of combination, but by the destruction of division.

    footnote: It should be noted that this ambiguity in the word "destruction" has been the cause of much misunderstanding. "Solve" is destruction, but so is "coagula." The aim of the Magus is to destroy his partial thought by uniting it with the Universal Thought, not to make a further breach and division in the Whole.

Weakness overcomes strength.

The most stable political edifice of history has been that of China, which was founded principally on politeness; and that of India has proved strong enough to absorb its many conquerors.

    footnote: The Brahmin caste is not so strict as that of the "heaven-born" (Indian Civil Service).

The Sword has been the great weapon of the last century. Every idea has been attacked by thinkers, and none has withstood attack. Hence civilization crumbles.

No settled principles remain. To-day all constructive statesmanship is empiricism or opportunism. It has been doubted whether there is any real relation between Mother and Child, any real distinction between Male and Female.

The human mind, in despair, seeing insanity imminent in the breaking up of these coherent images, has tried to replace them by ideals which are only saved from destruction, at the very moment of their birth, by their vagueness.

The Will of the King was at least ascertainable at any moment; nobody has yet devised a means for ascertaining the will of the people.

All conscious willed action is impeded; the march of events is now nothing but inertia.

Let the Magician consider these matters before he takes the Sword in his hand. Let him understand that the Ruach, this loose combination of 6 Sephiroth, only bound together by their attachment to the human will in Tiphereth, must be rent asunder.

The mind must be broken up into a form of insanity before it can be transcended.

David said: "I hate thoughts."

The Hindu says: "That which can be thought is not true."

Paul said: "The carnal mind is enmity against God."

And every one who meditates, even for an hour, will soon discover how this gusty aimless wind makes his flame flicker. "The wind bloweth where it listeth." The normal man is less than a straw.

    footnote: But as it is said, "Similia similibus curantur," we find this Ruach also the symbol of the Spirit. RVCh ALHIM, the Spirit of God, is 300, the number of the holy letter Shin. As this is the breath, which by its nature is double, the two edges of the Sword, the letter H symbolises breath, and H is the letter of Aries -- the House of Mars, of the Sword: and H is also the letter of the Mother; this is the link between the Sword and the Cup.

The connection between Breath and Mind has been supposed by some to exist merely in etymology. But the connection is a truer one.

    footnote: It is undoubted that Ruach means primarily "that which moves or revolves," "a going," "a wheel," "the wind," and that its secondary meaning was mind because of the observed instability of mind, and its tendency to a circular motion. "Spiritus" only came to mean Spirit in the modern technical sense owing to the efforts of the theologians. We have an example of the proper use of the word in the term: Spirit of Wine -- the airy portion of wine. But the word "inspire" was perhaps derived from observing the derangement of the breathing of persons in divine ecstasy.

In any case there is undoubtedly a connection between the respiratory and mental functions. The Student will find this out by practising Pranayama. By this exercise some thoughts are barred, and those which do come into the mind come more slowly than before, so that the mind has time to perceive their falsity and to destroy them.

On the blade of the Magick Sword is etched the name AGLA, a Notariqon formed from the initials of the sentence "Ateh Gibor Leolahm Adonai," "To thee be the Power unto the Ages, O my lord."

And the acid which eats into the steel should be oil of vitrol. Vitrol is a Notariqon of "Visita Interiora Terrae Rectificando Invenies Occultum Lapidem." That is to say: By investigating everything and bringing it into harmony and proportion you will find the hidden stone, the same stone of the philosophers of which mention has already been made, which turns all into gold. This oil which can eat into the steel, is further that which is written, Liber LXV, i, 16: "As an acid eats into steel . . . so am I unto the Spirit of Man."

Note how closely woven into itself is all this symbolism!

The centre of Ruach being the heart, it is seen that this Sword of the Ruach must be thrust by the Magician into his own heart.

But there is a subsequent task, of which it is spoken -- Liber VII, v, 47. "He shall await the sword of the Beloved and bare his throat for the stroke." In the throat is Daath -- the throne of Ruach. Daath is knowledge. This final destruction of knowledge opens the gate of the City of the Pyramids.

It is also written, Liber CCXX, iii, 11: "Let the woman be girt with a sword before me." But this refers to the arming of Vedana with Sanna, the overcoming of emotion by clarity of perception.

It is also spoken, Liber LXV, v, 14, of the Sword of Adonai, "that hath four blades, the blade of the Thunderbolt, the blade of the Pylon, the blade of the Serpent, the blade of the Phallus."

But this Sword is not for the ordinary Magician. For this is the Sword flaming every way that keeps Eden, and in this Sword the Wand and the Cup are concealed -- so that although the being of the Magician is blasted by the Thunderbolt, and poisoned by the Serpent, at the same time the organs whose union is the supreme sacrament are left in him.

At the coming of Adonai the individual is destroyed in both senses. He is shattered into a thousand pieces, yet at the same time united with the simple

    footnote: Compare the first set of verses in Liber XVI. (XVI in the Taro is Pe, Mars, the Sword.)

Of this it is also spoken by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Church in Thessalonica: "For the Lord shall descend from Heaven, with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them into the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we be for ever with the Lord."

The stupid interpretation of this verse as prophetic of a "second advent" need not concern us; every word of it is, however, worthy of profound consideration.

"The Lord" is Adonai -- which is the Hebrew for "my Lord"; and He descends from heaven, the supernal Eden, the Sahasrara Cakkra in man, with a "shout," a "voice," and a "trump," again airy symbols, for it is air that carries sound. These sounds refer to those heard by the Adept at the moment of rapture.

This is most accurately pictured in the Tarot Trump called "The Angel," which corresponds to the letter Shin, the letter of Spirit and of Breath.

The whole mind of man is rent by the advent of Adonai, and is at once caught up into union with Him. "In the air," the Ruach.

Note that etymologically the word {greek letters here: sigma-upsilon-nu}, "together with," is the Sanskrit "Sam;" and the Hebrew ADNI is the Sanskrit ADHI.

The phrase "together with the Lord," is then literally identical with the word Samadhi, which is the Sanskrit name of the phenomenon described by Saint Paul, this union of the ego and the non-ego, subject and object, this chymical marriage, and thus identical with the symbolism of the Rosy Cross, under a slightly different aspect.

And since marriage can only take place between one and one, it is evident that no idea can thus be united, unless it is simple.

Hence every idea must be analysed by the Sword. Hence, too, there must only be a single thought in the mind of the person meditating.

One may now go on to consider the use of the Sword in purifying emotions into perceptions.

It was the function of the Cup to interpret the perceptions by the tendencies; the Sword frees the perceptions from the Web of emotion.

The perceptions are meaningless in themselves; but the emotions are worse, for they delude their victim into supposing them significant and true.

Every emotion is an obsession; the most horrible of blasphemies is to attribute any emotion to God in the macrocosm, or to the pure soul in the microcosm.

How can that which is self-existent, complete, be "moved?" It is even written that "torsion about a point is iniquity."

    WEH footnote: See Macrobius, Iamblichus, Plotinus and sayings attributed to Pythagoras for these views

But if the point itself could be moved it would cease to be itself, for position is the only attribute of the point.

The Magician must therefore make himself absolutely free in this respect.

It is the constant practice of Demons to attempt to terrify, to shock, to disgust, to allure. Against all this he must oppose the Steel of the Sword. If he has got rid the ego-idea this task will be comparatively easy; unless he has done so it will be almost impossible. So says the Dhammapada:

Me he abused, and me he beat, he robbed me, he insulted me;
In whom such thoughts find harbourage, hatred will never cease to be.

And this hatred is the thought which inhibits the love whose apotheosis is Samadhi.

But it is too much to expect of the young Magician to practise attachment to the distasteful; let him first become indifferent. Let him endeavour to see facts as facts, as simply as he would see them if they were historical. Let him avoid the imaginative interpretation of any facts. Let him not put himself in the place of the people of whom the facts are related, or if he does so, let it be done only for the purpose of comprehension. Sympathy,

    footnote: It is true that sometimes sympathy is necessary to comprehension.

indignation, praise and blame, are out of place in the observer.

No one has properly considered the question as to the amount and quality of the light afforded by candles made by waxed Christians.

Who has any idea which joint of the ordinary missionary is preferred by epicures? It is only a matter of conjecture that Catholics are better eating than Presbyterians.

Yet these points and their kind are the only ones which have any importance at the time when the events occur.

Nero did not consider what unborn posterity might think of him; it is difficult to credit cannibals with the calculation that the recital of their exploits will induce pious old ladies to replenish their larder.

Very few people have ever "seen" a bull-fight. One set of people goes for excitement, another set for the perverse excitement which real or simulated horror affords. Very few people know that blood freshly spilled in the sunlight is perhaps the most beautiful colour that is to be found in nature.

It is a notorious fact that it is practically impossible to get a reliable description of what occurs at a spiritualistic "seance;" the emotions cloud the vision.

Only in the absolute calm of the laboratory, where the observer is perfectly indifferent to what may happen, only concerned to observe exactly what that happening is, to measure and to weigh it by means of instruments incapable of emotion, can one even begin to hope for a truthful record of events. Even the common physical bases of emotion, the senses of pleasure and pain, lead the observer infallibly to err. This though they be not sufficiently excited to disturb his mind.

Plunge one hand into a basin of hot water, the other into a basin of cold water, then both together into a basin of tepid water; the one hand will say hot, the other cold.

Even in instruments themselves, their physical qualities, such as expansion and contraction (which may be called, in a way, the roots of pleasure and pain), cause error.

Make a thermometer, and the glass is so excited by the necessary fusion that year by year, for thirty years afterwards or more, the height of the mercury will continue to alter; how much more then with so plastic a matter as the mind! There is no emotion which does not leave a mark on the mind, and all marks are bad marks. Hope and fear are only opposite phases of a single emotion; both are incompatible with the purity of the soul. With the passions of man the case is somewhat different, as they are functions of his own will. They need to be disciplined, not to be suppressed. But emotion is impressed from without. It is an invasion of the circle.

As the Dhammapada says:

An ill-thatched house is open to the mercy of the rain and wind;
So passion hath the power to break into an unreflecting mind.
A well-thatched house is proof against the fury of the rain and wind;
So passion hath no power to break into a rightly-ordered mind.

Let then the Student practise observation of those things which normally would cause him emotion; and let him, having written a careful description of what he sees, check it by the aid of some person familiar with such sights.

Surgical operations and dancing girls are fruitful fields for the beginner.

In reading emotional books such as are inflicted on children, let him always endeavour to see the event from the standpoint opposite to that of the author. Yet let him not emulate the partially emancipated child who complained of a picture of the Colosseum that "there was one poor little lion who hadn't got any Christian," except in the first instance. Adverse criticism is the first step; the second must go further.

Having sympathized sufficiently with both the lions and the Christians, let him open his eyes to that which his sympathy had masked hitherto, that the picture is abominably conceived, abominably composed, abominably drawn, and abominably coloured, as it is pretty sure to be.

Let him further study those masters, in science or in art, who have observed with minds untinctured by emotion.

Let him learn to detect idealizations, to criticize and correct them.

Let him understand the falsehood of Raphael, of Watteau, of Leighton, of Bouguereau; let him appreciate the truthfulness of John, of Rembrandt, of Titian, of O'Conor.

Similar studies in literature and philosophy will lead to similar results. But do not let him neglect the analysis of his own emotions; for until these are overcome he will be incapable of judging others.

This analysis may be carried out in various ways; one is the materialistic way. For example, if oppressed by nightmare, let him explain: "This nightmare is a cerebral congestion."

The strict way of doing this by meditation is Mahasatipatthana,

    footnote: See Crowley, "Collected Works," vol. ii, pp. 252-254.

but it should be aided in every moment of life by endeavouring to estimate occurrences at their true value. Their relativity in particular must be carefully considered.

Your toothache does not hurt any one outside a very small circle. Floods in China mean to you nothing but a paragraph in the newspaper. The destruction of the world itself would have no significance in Sirius. One can hardly imagine even that the astronomers of Sirius could perceive so trifling a disturbance.

Now considering that Sirius itself is only, as far as you know, but one, and one of the least important, of the ideas in your mind, why should that mind be disturbed by your toothache? It is not possible to labour this point without tautology, for it is a very simple one; but it should be emphasised, for it is a very simple one. Waugh! Waugh! Waugh! Waugh! Waugh!

In the question of ethics it again becomes vital, for to many people it seems impossible to consider the merits of any act without dragging in a number of subjects which have no real connection with it.

The Bible has been mistranslated by perfectly competent scholars because they had to consider the current theology. The most glaring example is the "Song of Solomon," a typical piece of Oriental eroticism. But since to admit that it was this would never do for a canonical book, they had to pretend that it was symbolical.

They tried to refine away the grossness of the expressions, but even their hardihood proved unequal to the task.

This form of dishonesty reaches its climax in the expurgating of the classics. "The Bible is the Word of God, written by holy men, as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost. But we will cut out those passages which we think unsuitable." "Shakespeare is our greatest poet -- but, of course, he is very dreadful." "No one can surpass the lyrics of Shelley, but we must pretend that he was not an atheist."

Some translators could not bear that the heathen Chinese should use the word Shang Ti, and pretended that it did not mean God. Others, compelled to admit that it did mean God, explained that the use of the term showed that "God had not left himself without a witness even in this most idolatrous of nations. They had been mysteriously compelled to use it, not knowing what it meant." All this because of their emotional belief that they were better than the Chinese.

The most dazzling example of this is shown in the history of the study of Buddhism.

The early scholars simply could not understand that the Buddhist canon denies the soul, regards the ego as a delusion caused by a special faculty of the diseased mind, could not understand that the goal of the Buddhist, Nibbana, was in any way different from their own goal, Heaven, in spite of the perfect plainness of the language in such dialogues as those between the Arahat Nagasena and King Melinda; and their attempts to square the text with their preconceptions will always stand as one of the great follies of the wise.

Again, it is almost impossible for the well-mannered Christian to realize that Jesus Christ ate with his fingers. The temperance advocate makes believe that the wine at the marriage feast of Cana was non-alcoholic.

It is a sort of mad syllogism.

"Nobody whom I respect does this."

"I respect So-and-so."

"Therefore, So-and-so did not do this."

The moralist of to-day is furious when one points to the fact that practically every great man in history was grossly and notoriously immoral.

Enough of this painful subject!

As long as we try to fit facts to theories instead of adopting the scientific attitude of altering the theories (when necessary) to fit the facts, we shall remain mired in falsehood.

The religious taunt the scientific man with this open-mindedness, with this adaptability. "Tell a lie and stick to it!" is "their" golden rule.

{diagram on this page: The Sigillum Dei Aemeth pantacle, taken from the version in the Equinox. This caption below: "THE SIGILLUM DEI AEMETH, A PANTACLE MADE BY DR. JOHN DEE.}

CHAPTER IX
THE PANTACLE

AS the Magick Cup is the heavenly food of the Magus, so is the Magick Pantacle his earthly food.

The Wand was his divine force, and the Sword his human force.

The Cup is hollow to receive the influence from above. The Pantacle is flat like the fertile plains of earth.

The name Pantacle implies an image of the All, "omne in parvo;" but this is by a magical transformation of the Pantacle. Just as we made the Sword symbolical of everything by the force of our Magick, so do we work upon the Pantacle. That which is merely a piece of common bread shall be the body of God!

The Wand was the will of man, his wisdom, his word; the Cup was his understanding, the vehicle of grace; the Sword was his reason; and the Pantacle shall be his body, the temple of the Holy Ghost.

What is the length of this Temple?

From North to South.

What is the breadth of this Temple?

From East to West.

What is the height of this Temple?

From the Abyss to the Abyss.

There is, therefore, nothing movable or immovable under the whole firmament of heaven which is not included in this pantacle, though it be but "eight inches in diameter, and in thickness half an inch."

Fire is not matter at all; water is a combination of elements; air almost entirely a mixture of elements; earth contains all both in admixture and in combination.

So must it be with this Pantacle, the symbol of earth.

And as this Pantacle is made of pure wax, do not forget that "everything that lives is holy."

All phenomena are sacraments. Every fact, and even every falsehood, must enter into the Pantacle; it is the great storehouse from which the Magician draws.

"In the brown cakes of corn we shall taste the food of the world and be strong."

    footnote: We have avoided dealing with the Pantacle as the Paten of the Sacrament, though special instructions about it are given in Liber Legis. It is composed of meal, honey, wine, holy oil, and blood.

When speaking of the Cup, it was shown how every fact must be made significant, how every stone must have its proper place in the mosaic. Woe were it were one stone misplaced! But that mosaic cannot be wrought at all, well or ill, unless every stone be there.

These stones are the simple impressions or experiences; not one may be foregone.

Do not refuse anything merely because you know that it is the cup of Poison offered by your enemy; drink it with confidence; it is he that will fall dead!

    WEH footnote: Metaphor. Not for reading by children!

How can I give Cambodian art its proper place in art, if I have never heard of Cambodia? How can the Geologist estimate the age of what lies beneath the chalk unless he have a piece of knowledge totally unconnected with geology, the life-history of the animals of whom that chalk is the remains?

This then is a very great difficulty for the Magician. He cannot possibly have all experience, and though he may console himself philosophically with the reflection that the Universe is conterminous with such experience as he has, he will find it grow at such a pace during the early years of his life that he may almost be tempted to believe in the possibility of experiences beyond his own, and from a practical standpoint he will seem to be confronted with so many avenues of knowledge that he will be bewildered which to choose.

The ass hesitated between two thistles; how much more that greater ass, that incomparably greater ass, between two thousand!

Fortunately it does not matter very much; but he should at least choose those branches of knowledge which abut directly upon universal problems.

He should choose not one but several, and these should be as diverse as possible in nature.

It is important that he should strive to excel in some sport, and that that sport should be the one best calculated to keep this body in health.

He should have a thorough grounding in classics, mathematics and science; also enough general knowledge of modern languages and of the shifts of life to enable him to travel in any part of the world with ease and security.

History and geography he can pick up as he wants them; and what should interest him most in any subject is its links with some other subject, so that his Pantacle may not lack what painters call "composition."

He will find that, however good his memory may be, ten thousand impressions enter his mind for every one that it is able to retain even for a day. And the excellence of a memory lies in the wisdom of its selection.

The best memories so select and judge that practically nothing is retained which has not some coherence with the general plan of the mind.

All Pantacles will contain the ultimate conceptions of the circle and the cross, though some will prefer to replace the cross by a point, or by a Tau, or by a triangle. The Vesica Pisces is sometimes used instead of the circle, or the circle may be glyphed as a serpent. Time and space and the idea of causality are sometimes represented; so also are the three stages in the history of philosophy, in which the three objects of study were successively Nature, God, and Man.

The duality of consciousness is also sometimes represented; and the Tree of Life itself may be figured therein, or the categories. An emblem of the Great Work should be added. But the Pantacle will be imperfect unless each idea is contrasted in a balanced manner with its opposite, and unless there is a necessary connection between each pair of ideas and every other pair.

The Neophyte will perhaps do well to make the first sketches for his Pantacle very large and complex, subsequently simplifying, not so much by exclusion as by combination, just as a Zoologist, beginning with the four great Apes and Man, combines all in the single word "primate."

It is not wise to simplify too far, since the ultimate hieroglyphic must be an infinite. The ultimate resolution not having been performed, its symbol must not be portrayed.

If any person were to gain access to V.V.V.V.V.,

    footnote: The Motto of the Chief of the A.'.A.'., "the Light of the World Himself."

and ask Him to discourse upon any subject, there is little doubt that He could only comply by an unbroken silence, and even that might not be wholly satisfactory, since the Tao Teh King says that the Tao cannot be declared either by silence or by speech.

In this preliminary task of collecting materials, the idea of the Ego is not of such great moment; all impressions are phases of the non-ego, and the Ego serves merely as a receptacle. In fact, to the well regulated mind, there is no question but that the impressions are real, and that the mind, if not a "tabula rasa," is only not so because of the "tendencies" or "innate ideas" which prevent some ideas from being received as readily as others.

    footnote: It does not occur to a newly-hatched chicken to behave in the same way as a new-born child.

These "tendencies" must be combated: distasteful facts should be insisted upon until the Ego is perfectly indifferent to the nature of its food.

"Even as the diamond shall glow red for the rose, and green for the rose-leaf, so shalt thou abide apart from the Impressions."

This great task of separating the self from the impressions or "vrittis" is one of the may meanings of the aphorism "solve," corresponding to the "coagula" implied in Samadhi, and this Pantacle therefore represents all that we are, the resultant of all that we had a tendency to be.

In the Dhammapada we read:

All that we are from mind results; on mind is founded, built of mind;
Who acts or speaks with evil thought him doth pain follow sure and blind.
So the ox plants his foot, and so the car wheel follows hard behind.
All that we are from mind results; on mind is founded, built of mind;
Who acts or speaks with righteous thought him happiness doth surely find.
So failing not the shadow falls for ever in its place assigned.
The Pantacle is then in a sense identical with the Karma or Kamma of the Magician.

The Karma of a man is his "ledger." The balance has not been struck and he does not know what it is; he does not even fully know what debts he may have to pay, or what is owed him; nor does he know on what dates even those payments which he anticipates may fall due.

A business conducted on such lines would be in a terrible mess; and we find in fact that man is in just such a mess. While he is working day and night at some unimportant detail of his affairs, some giant force may be advancing "pede claudo" to overtake him.

Many of the entries in this "ledger" are for the ordinary man necessarily illegible; the method of reading them is given in that important instruction of the A.'.A.'. called "Thisharb," Liber CMXIII.

Now consider that this Karma is all that a man has or is. His ultimate object is to get rid of it completely -- when it comes to the point of surrendering

    footnote: To surrender all, one must give up not only the bad but the good; not only weakness but strength. How can the mystic surrender all, while he clings to his virtues?

the Self to the Beloved; but in the beginning the Magician is not that Self, he is only the heap of refuse from which that Self is to be built up. The Magical instruments must be made before they are destroyed.

This idea of Karma has been confused by many who ought to have know better, including the Buddha, with the ideas of poetic justice and of retribution.

We have the story of one of the Buddha's Arahats, who being blind, in walking up and down unwittingly killed a number of insects. [The Buddhist regards the destruction of life as the most shocking crime.] His brother Arahats inquired as to how this was, and Buddha spun them a long yarn as to how, in a previous incarnation, he had maliciously deprived a woman of her sight. This is only a fairy tale, a bogey to frighten the children, and probably the worst way of influencing the young yet devised by human stupidity.

Karma does not work in this way at all.

In any case moral fables have to be very carefully constructed, or they may prove dangerous to those who use them.

You will remember Bunyan's Passion and Patience: naughty Passion played with all this toys and broke them, good little Patience put them carefully aside. Bunyan forgets to mention that by the time Passion had broken all his toys, he had outgrown them.

Karma does not act in this tit-for-tat-way. An eye for an eye is a sort of savage justice, and the idea of justice in our human sense is quite foreign to the constitution of the Universe.

Karma is the Law of Cause and Effect. There is no proportion in its operations. Once an accident occurs it is impossible to say what may happen; and the Universe is a stupendous accident.

We go out to tea a thousand times without mishap, and the thousand-and-first time we meet some one who changes radically the course of our lives for ever.

There is a sort of sense in which every impression that is made upon our minds is the resultant of all the forces of the past; no incident is so trifling that it has not in some way shaped one's disposition. But there is none of this crude retribution about it. One may kill a hundred thousand lice in one brief hour at the foot of the Baltoro Glacier, as Frater P. once did. It would be stupid to suppose, as the Theosophist inclines to suppose, that this action involves one in the doom of being killed by a louse a hundred thousand times.

This ledger of Karma is kept separate from the petty cash account; and in respect of bulk this petty cash account is very much bigger than the ledger.

If we eat too much salmon we get indigestion and perhaps nightmare. It is silly to suppose that a time will come when a salmon will eat us, and find us disagree.

On the other hand we are always being terribly punished for actions that are not faults at all. Even our virtues rouse insulted nature to revenge.

Karma only grows by what it fees on: and if Karma is to be properly brought up, it requires a very careful diet.

With the majority of people their actions cancel each other out; no sooner is effort made than it is counterbalanced by idleness. Eros gives place to Anteros.

Not one man in a thousand makes even an apparent escape from the commonplace of animal life.

Birth is sorrow;
Life is sorrow;
Sorrowful are old age, disease, and death;
But resurrection is the greatest misery of all.

"Oh what misery! birth incessantly!" as Buddha said.

One goes on from day to day with a little of this and a little of that, a few kind thoughts and a few unkind thoughts; nothing really gets done. Body and mind are changed, changed beyond recall by nightfall. But what "meaning" has any of this change?

How few there are who can look back through the years and say that they have made advance in any definite direction? And in how few is that change, such as it is, a variable with intelligence and conscious volition! The dead weight of the original conditions under which we were born has counted for far more than all our striving. The unconscious forces are incomparably greater than those of which we have any knowledge. This is the "solidity" of our Pantacle, the Karma of our earth that whirls us will he nill he around her axis at the rate of a thousand miles an hour. And a thousand is Aleph, a capital Aleph, the microcosm of all-wandering air, the fool of the Taro, the aimlessness and fatality of things!

It is very difficult then in any way to "fashion" this heavy Pantacle.

We can engrave characters upon it with the dagger, but they will scarcely come to more than did the statue of Ozymandias, King of Kings, in the midst of the unending desert.

We cut a figure on the ice; it is effaced in a morning by the tracks of other skaters; nor did that figure do more than scratch the surface of the ice, and the ice itself must melt before the sun. Indeed the Magician may despair when he comes to make the Pantacle! Everyone has the material, one man's pretty well as good as his brothers; but for that Pantacle to be in any way fashioned to a willed end, or even to an intelligible end, or even to a known end: "Hoc opus, Hic labor est." It is indeed the toil of ascending from Avernus, and escaping to the upper air.

In order to do it, it is most necessary to understand our tendencies, and to will the development of one, the destruction of another. And though all elements in the Pantacle must ultimately be destroyed, yet some will help us directly to reach a position from which this task of destruction becomes possible; and there is no element therein which may not be occasionally helpful.

And so -- beware! Select! Select! Select!

This Pantacle is an infinite storehouse; things will always be there when we want them. We may see to it occasionally that they are dusted and the moth kept out, but we shall usually be too busy to do much more. Remember that in travelling from the earth to the stars, one dare not be encumbered with too much heavy luggage. Nothing that is not a necessary part of the machine should enter into its composition.

Now though this Pantacle is composed only of shams, some shams somehow seem to be more false than others.

The whole Universe is an illusion, but it is an illusion difficult to get rid of. It is true compared with most things. But ninety-nine out of every hundred impressions are false even in relation to the things on their own plane.

Such distinctions must be graven deeply upon the surface of the Pantacle by the Holy Dagger.

There is only one other of the elemental Instruments to be considered, namely the Lamp.

CHAPTER X
THE LAMP

IN Liber A. vel Armorum, the official instruction of the A.'.A.'. for the preparation of the elemental weapons, it is said that each symbolic representation of the Universe is to be approved by the Superior of the Magician. To this rule the Lamp is an exception; it is said:

"A Magical Lamp that shall burn without wick or oil, being fed by the Aethyr. This shall he accomplish secretly and apart, without asking the advice or approval of his Adeptus Minor."

This Lamp is the light of the pure soul; it hath no need of fuel, it is the Burning Bush incomsumable that Moses saw, the image of the Most High.

This Lamp hangeth above the Altar, it hath no support from below; its light illumines the whole Temple, yet upon it are cast no shadows, no reflections. It cannot be touched, it cannot be extinguished, in no way can it change; for it is utterly apart from all those things which have complexity, which have dimension, which change and may be changed.

When the eyes of the Magus are fixed upon this Lamp naught else exists.

The Instruments lie idle on the Altar; that Light alone burns eternally.

The Divine Will that was the Wand is no more; for the path has become one with the Goal.

The Divine Understanding that was the Cup is no more; for the subject and Object of intelligence are one.

The Divine Reason that was the Sword is no more; for the complex has been resolved into the Simple.

And the Divine Substance that was the Pantacle is no more; for the many has become the One.

Eternal, unconfined, unextended, without cause and without effect, the Holy Lamp mysteriously burns. Without quantity or quality, unconditioned and sempiternal, is this Light.

It is not possible for anyone to advise or approve; for this Lamp is not made with hands; it exists alone for ever; it has no parts, no person; it is before "I am." Few can behold it, yet it is always there. For it there is no "here" nor "there," no "then" nor "now;" all parts of speech are abolished, save the noun; and this noun is not found either in human speech or in Divine. It is the Lost Word, the dying music of whose sevenfold echo is I A O and A U M. Without this Light the Magician could not work at all; yet few indeed are the Magicians that have know of it, and far fewer They that have beheld its brilliance!

The Temple and all that is in it must be destroyed again and again before it is worthy to receive that Light. Hence it so often seems that the only advice that any master can give to any pupil is to destroy the Temple.

"Whatever you have" and "whatever you are" are veils before that Light.

Yet in so great ~a matter all advice is vain. There is no master so great that he can see clearly the whole character of any pupil. What helped him in the past may hinder another in the future.

Yet since the Master is pledged to serve, he may take up that service on these simple lines. Since all thoughts are veils of this Light, he may advise the destruction of all thoughts, and to that end teach those practices which are clearly conductive to such destruction.

These practices have now fortunately been set down in clear language by order of the A.'.A.'..

In these instructions the relativity and limitation of each practice is clearly taught, and all dogmatic interpretations are carefully avoided. Each practice is in itself a demon which must be destroyed; but to be destroyed it must first be evoked.

Shame upon that Master who shirks any one of these practices, however distasteful or useless it may be to him! For in the detailed knowledge of it, which experience alone can give him, may lie his opportunity for crucial assistance to a pupil. However dull the drudgery, it should be undergone. If it were possible to regret anything in life, which is fortunately not the case, it would be the hours wasted in fruitful practices which might have been more profitably employed on sterile ones: for NEMO

    footnote: NEMO is the Master of the Temple, whose task it is to develop the beginner. See Liber CDXVIII, Aethyr XIII.

in tending his garden seeketh not to single out the flower that shall be NEMO after him. And we are not told that NEMO might have used other things than those which he actually does use; it seems possible that if he had not the acid or the knife, or the fire, or the oil, he might miss tending just that one flower which was to be NEMO after him!

CHAPTER XI
THE CROWN

THE Crown of the Magician represents the Attainment of his Work. It is a band of pure gold, on the front of which stand three pentagrams, and on the back a hexagram. The central pentagram contains a diamond or a great opal; the other three symbols contain the Tau. Around this Crown is twined the golden Ureaus serpent, with erect head and expanded hood. Under the Crown is a crimson cap of maintenance, which falls to the shoulders.

Instead of this, the Ateph Crown of Thoth is sometimes worn; for Thoth is the God of Truth, of Wisdom, and the Teacher of Magick. The Ateph Crown has two ram's horns, showing energy, dominion, the force that breaks down obstacles, the sign of the spring. Between these horns is the disk of the sun; from this springs a Lotus upheld by the twin plumes of truth, and three other sun-disks are upheld, one by the cup of the lotus, the others beneath the curving feathers.

There is still another Crown, the Crown of Amoun, the concealed one, from whom the Hebrews borrowed their holy word "Amen." This Crown consists simply of the plumes of truth. But into the symbolism of these it is not necessary to go, for all this and more is in the Crown first described.

The crimson cap implies concealment, and is also symbolical of the flood of glory that pours upon the Magician from above. It is of velvet for the softness of that divine kiss, and crimson for that it is the very blood of God which is its life. The band of gold is the eternal circle of perfection. The three pentagrams symbolize the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, while the hexagram represents the Magician himself. Ordinarily, pentagrams represent the microcosm, hexagrams the macrocosm; but here the reverse is the case, because in this Crown of Perfection, that which is below has become that which is above, and that which is above had become that which is below. If a diamond be worn, it is for the Light which is before all manifestations in form; if an opal, it is to commemorate that sublime plan of the All, to fold and unfold in eternal rapture, to manifest as the Many that the Many may become the One Unmanifest. But this matter is too great for an elementary treatise on Magick.

The Serpent which is coiled about the Crown means many things, or, rather, one thing in many ways. It is the symbol of royalty and of initiation, for the Magician is anointed King and Priest.

It also represents Hadit, of which one can here only quote these words: "I am the secret serpent coiled about to spring; in my coiling there is joy. If I lift up my head, I and my Nuit are one; if I droop down mine head and shoot forth venom, there is rapture of the earth, and I and the earth are one."

The serpent is also the Kundalini serpent, the Magical force itself, the manifesting side of the Godhead of the Magician, whose unmanifested side is peace and silence, of which there is no symbol.

In the Hindu system the Great Work is represented by saying that this serpent, which is normally coiled at the base of the spine, rises with her hood over the head of the Yogi, there to unite with the Lord of all.

The serpent is also he who poisons. It is that force which destroys the manifested Universe. This is also the emerald snake which encircles the Universe. This matter must be studied in Liber LXV, where this is discussed incomparably. In the hood of this serpent are the six jewels, three on each side, Ruby, Emerald, and Sapphire, the three holy elements made perfect, on both sides in equilibrium.

CHAPTER XII
THE ROBE

THE Robe of the Magician may be varied according to his grade and the nature of his working.

There are two principal Robes, the white and the black; of these the black is more important than the white, for the white has no hood. These Robes may be varied by the addition of various symbols, but in any case the shape of the Robe is a Tau.

The general symbolism which we have adopted leads us, however, to prefer the description of a Robe which few dare wear. This Robe is of a rich silk of deep pure blue, the blue of the night sky: it is embroidered with golden stars, and with roses and lilies. Around the hem, its tail in its mouth, is the great serpent, while upon the front from neck to hem falls the Arrow described in the Vision of the Fifth Aethyr. This Robe is lined with purple silk on which is embroidered a green serpent coiled from neck to hem. The symbolism of this Robe treats of high mysteries which must be studied in Liber CCXX and Liber CDXVIII; but having thus dealt with special Robes, let us consider the use of the Robe in general.

The Robe is that which conceals, and which protects the Magician from the elements; it is the silence and secrecy with which he works, the hiding of himself in the occult life of Magick and Meditation. This is the "going away into the wilderness" which we find in the lives of all men of the highest types of greatness. And it is also the withdrawing of one's self from life as such.

In another sense it is the "Aura" of the Magician, that invisible egg or sheath which surrounds him. This "Aura" must be shining, elastic, impenetrable, even by the light, that is, by any partial light that comes from one side.

The only light of the Magician is from the Lamp which hangs above his head, as he stands in the centre of the Circle, and the Robe, being open at the neck, opposes no obstacles to the passage of this light. And being open, and very wide open, at the bottom, it permits that light to pass and illumine them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death.

CHAPTER XIII
THE BOOK

THE Book of Spells or of Conjurations is the Record of every thought, word, and deed of the Magician; for everything that he has willed is willed to a purpose. It is the same as if he had taken an oath to perform some achievement.

Now this Book must be a holy Book, not a scribbling-book in which you jot down every piece of rubbish that comes into your head. It is written, Liber VII, v, 23: "Every breath, every word, every thought, every deed is an act of love with Thee. Be this devotion a potent spell to exorcise the demons of the Five."

This Book must then be thus written. In the first place the Magician must perform the practice laid down in Liber CMXIII so that he understands perfectly who he is, and to what his development must necessarily tend. So much for the first page of the Book.

Let him then be careful to write nothing therein that is inharmonious or untrue. Nor can he avoid this writing, for this is a Magick Book. If you abandon even for an hour the one purpose of your life, you will find a number of meaningless scratches and scrawls on the white vellum; and these cannot be erased. In such a case, when you come to conjure a demon by the power of the Book, he will mock you; he will point to all this foolish writing, more like his own than yours. In vain will you continue with the subsequent spells; you have broken by your own foolishness the chain which would have bound him.

Even the calligraphy of the Book must be firm, clear, and beautiful; in the cloud of incense it is hard to read the conjurations. While you peer dimly through the smoke, the demon will vanish, and you will have to write the terrible word "failure."

And yet there is no page of this Book on which this word is not written; but so long as it is immediately followed by a new affirmation, all is not lost; and as in this Book the word "failure" is thus made of little account, so also must the word "success" never be employed, for its is the last word that may be written therein, and it is followed by a full stop.

This full stop may never be written anywhere else; for the writing of the Book goes on eternally; there is no way of closing the record until the goal of all has been attained. Let every page of this Book be filled with song -- for it is a Book of incantation!

CHAPTER XIV
THE BELL

THE Magical Bell is best attached to the chain. In some systems of Magick a number of bells have been worn, sewn upon the hem of the robe with the idea of symbolizing that every movement of the Magician should make music. But the Bell of which we shall speak is a more important implement. This Bell summons and alarms; and it is also the Bell which sounds at the elevation of the Host.

It is thus also the "Astral Bell" of the Magician.

    footnote: During certain meditation-practices the Student hears a bell resound in the depths of his being. It is not subjective, for it is sometimes heard by other people. Some Magicians are able to call the attention of those with whom they wish to communicate at a distance by its means, or, so it is said.

The Bell of which we speak is a disk of some two inches in diameter, very slightly bent into a shape not unlike that of a cymbal. A hole in the centre permits the passage of a short leather thong, by which it may be attached to the chain. At the other end of the chain is the striker; which, in Tibet, is usually made of human bone.

The Bell itself is made of electrum magicum, an alloy of the "seven metals" blended together in a special manner. First the gold is melted up with the silver during a favourable aspect of the sun and moon; these are then fused with tin when Jupiter is well dignified. Lead is added under an auspicious Saturn; and so for the quicksilver, copper, and iron, when Mercury, Venus, and Mars are of good augury.

The sound of this Bell is indescribably commanding, solemn, and majestic. Without even the minutest jar, its single notes tinkle fainter and fainter into silence. At the sound of this Bell the Universe ceases for an indivisible moment of time, and attends to the Will of the Magician. Let him not interrupt the sound of this Bell. Let this be that which is written, Liber VII, v, 31: "There is a solemnity of the silence. There is no more voice at all."

As the Magical Book was the record of the past, so is the Magick Bell the prophecy of the future. The manifested shall repeat itself again and again, always a clear thin note, always a simplicity of music, yet ever less and less disturbing the infinite silence until the end.

CHAPTER XV
THE LAMEN

THE breastplate or Lamen of the Magician is a very elaborate and important symbol. In the Jewish system we read that the High Priest was to wear a plate with twelve stones, for the twelve tribes of Israel (with all their correspondences), and in this plate were kept the Urim and Thummin.

    footnote: Scholars are uncertain as to what these really were, though apparently they were methods of divination.

The modern Lamen is, however, a simple plate which (being worn over the heart) symbolizes Tiphereth, and it should therefore be a harmony of all the other symbols in one. It connects naturally by its shape with the Circle and the Pentacle; but it is not sufficient to repeat the design of either.

The Lamen of the spirit whom one wishes to evoke is both placed in the triangle and worn on the breast; but in this case, since that which we wish to evoke in nothing partial, but whole, we shall have but a single symbol to combine the two. The Great Work will then form the subject of the design.

    footnote: Some writers have actually confused the Lamen with the Pantacle, usually through a misunderstanding of the nature of the latter. Dr. Dee's "Sigillum Dei Amath" makes a fine pantacle, but it would be useless as a lamen, Eliphas Levi made several attempts to draw one or the other, he never seemed sure which. Fortunately he knows better now. The lamens given in the Lesser and Greater Keys of "Solomon" are rather better, but we know of no perfect example. The design on the cover of "The Star in the West" represents an early effort of Fra. P.

In this Lamen the Magician must place the secret keys of his power.

The Pentacle is merely the material to be worked upon, gathered together and harmonized but not yet in operation, the parts of the engine arranged for use, or even put together, but not yet set in motion. In the Lamen these forces are already at work; even accomplishment is prefigured.

In the system of Abramelin the Lamen is a plate of silver upon which the Holy Guardian Angel writes in dew. This is another way of expressing the same thing, for it is He who confers the secrets of that power which should be herein expressed. St. Paul expresses the same thing when he says that the breastplate is faith, and can withstand the fiery darts of the wicked. "This "faith" is not blind self-confidence and credulity; it is that self confidence which only comes when self is forgotten.

{figure on this page: A vesica with balances, sword, rose and crown, along with several letters and numbers. This caption beneath: "EXAMPLE OF DESIGN FOR A LAMEN"}

It is the "Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel" which confers this faith. The task of attaining to this Knowledge and Conversation is the sole task of him who would be called Adept. An absolute method for achieving this is given in the Eighth Aethyr (Liber CDXVIII, Equinox V).

{illustration on this page: a pot supported by a tripod with arms up and over the top to hold up a perforated circular grate. The upper extensions of the arms are flame-shaped. This caption beneath: "THE CENSER (CROWLEY'S PATENT PATTERN)."}

CHAPTER XVI
THE MAGICK FIRE; WITH CONSIDERATIONS OF THE THURIBLE, THE CHARCOAL, AND THE INCENSE

INTO the Magick Fire all things are cast. It symbolizes the final burning up of all things in Shivadarshana. It is the absolute destruction alike of the Magician and the Universe.

The Thurible stands upon a small altar. "My altar is of open brass work: burn thereon in silver or gold!"

    WEH footnote: quotation corrected

This altar stands in the East, as if to symbolize the identity of Hope and Annihilation. This brass contains the metals of Jupiter and Venus fused in a homogeneous alloy. This is then symbolical of divine love, and it is "open brass work" because this love is not limited in direction or extent; it is not particularized, it is universal.

Upon this altar stands the Censer proper; it has three legs symbolical of fire.

    footnote: Because Shin the Hebrew letter of Fire, has three tongues of flame, and its value is 300.

Its cup is a hemisphere, and supported from its edge is a plate pierced with holes. This censer is of silver or gold, because there were called the perfect metals; it is upon perfection that the imperfect is burned. Upon this plate burns a great fire of charcoal, impregnated with nitre. This charcoal is (as chemists now begin to surmise) the ultimate protean element: absolutely black, because it absorbs all light; infusible by the application of any known heat; the lightest of those elements which occur in the solid state in nature; the essential constituent of all known forms of life.

It has been treated with nitre, whose potassium has the violet flame of Jupiter, the father of all, whose nitrogen is that inert element which by proper combination becomes a constituent of all the most explosive bodies known; and oxygen, the food of fire.

    WEH footnote: That is to say, this nitre is Potassium Nitrate or "Salt Peter". Such charcoal impregnated with Potash is now commonly sold for incense burning in the form of disks with an indentation in the top, "Three Kings Charcoal" is a popular brand, but some "self-starting" barbecue brickettes are also of this composition and much less expensive.

This fire is blown upon by the Magician; this blaze of destruction has been kindled by his word and by his will.

Into this Fire he casts the Incense, symbolical of prayer, the gross vehicle or image of his aspiration. Owing to the imperfection of this image, we obtain mere smoke instead of perfect combustion. But we cannot use explosives instead of incense, because it would not be true. Our prayer is the expression of the lower aspiring to the higher; it is without the clear vision of the higher, it does not understand what the higher wants. And, however sweet may be its smell, it is always cloudy.

In this smoke illusions arise. We sought the light, and behold the Temple is darkened! In the darkness this smoke seems to take strange shapes, and we may hear the crying of beasts. The thicker the smoke, the darker grows the Universe. We gasp and tremble, beholding what foul and unsubstantial things we have evoked!

Yet we cannot do without the Incense! Unless our aspiration took form it could not influence form. This also is the mystery of incarnation.

This Incense is based upon Gum Olibanum, the sacrifice of the human will of the heart. This olibanum has been mixed with half its weight of storax, the earthly desires, dark, sweet, and clinging; and this again with half its weight of lignum aloes, which symbolizes Sagittarius, the arrow,

    footnote: Note that there are two arrows: the Divine shot downward, the human upward. The former is the Oil, the latter the Incense, or rather the finest part of it. See Liber CDXVIII, Fifth Aethyr.

and so represents the aspiration itself; it is the arrow that cleaves the rainbow. This arrow is "Temperance" in the Taro; it is a life equally balanced and direct which makes our work possible; yet this life itself must be sacrificed!

In the burning up of these things arise in our imagination those terrifying or alluring phantasms which throng the "Astral Plane." This smoke represents the "Astral Plane," which lies between the material and the spiritual. One may now devote a little attention to the consideration of this "plane," about which a great deal of nonsense has been written.

When a man shuts his eyes and begins to look about him, at first there is nothing but darkness. If he continues trying to penetrate the gloom, a new pair of eyes gradually opens.

Some people think that these are the "eyes of imagination." Those with more experience understand that this truly represents things seen, although those things are themselves totally false.

As first the seer will perceive gray gloom; in subsequent experiments perhaps figures may appear with whom the seer may converse, and under whose guidance he may travel about. This "plane" being quite as large and varied as the material Universe, one cannot describe it effectively; we must refer the reader to Liber O and to Equinox II, pages 295 to 334.

This "Astral Plane" has been described by Homer in the Odyssey. Here are Polyphemus and the Laestrygons, here Calypso and the Sirens. Here, too, are those things which many have imagined to be the "spirits" of the dead. If the student once take any of these things for truth, he must worship it, since all truth is worshipful. In such a case he is lost; the phantom will have power over him; it will obsess him.

As long as an idea is being examined you are free from it. There is no harm in man's experimenting with opium-smoking or feeding on nuts; but the moment he ceases to examine, to act from habit and without reflection, he is in trouble. We all of us eat too much, because people, liveried and obsequious, have always bustled up five times daily with six months' provisions, and it was less trouble to feed and be done with it, than to examine the question whether we were hungry. If you cook your own food, you soon find that you don't cook more or less than you want; and health returns. If, however, you go to the other extreme and think of nothing but diet, you are almost sure to acquire that typical form of melancholia, in which the patient is convinced that all the world is in league to poison him. Professor Schweinhund has shown that beef causes gout; Professor Naschtikoff proves that milk causes consumption. Sir Ruffon Wratts tells us that old age is brought on by eating cabbage. By and by you reach the state of which Mr. Hereward Carrington make his proud boast: your sole food is chocolate, which you chew unceasingly, even in your dreams. Yet no sooner have you taken it into you than you awake to the terrible truth demonstrated by Guterbock Q. Hosenscheisser, Fourth Avenue, Grand Rapids, that chocolate is the cause of constipation, and constipation of cancer, and proceed to get it out of you by means of an enema which would frighten a camel into convulsions.

A similar madness attacks even real men of science. Metchnikoff studied the diseases of the colon until he could see nothing else, and then calmly proposed to cut out every one's colon, pointing out that a vulture (who has no colon) is a very long-lived bird. As a matter of fact the longevity of the vulture is due to its twisted neck, and many thoughtful persons propose to experiment on Professor Metchnikoff.

But the worst of all phantasms are the moral ideas and the religious ideas. Sanity consists in the faculty of adjusting ideas in proper proportion. Any one who accepts a moral or religious truth without understanding it is only kept out of the asylum because he does not follow it out logically. If one really believed in Christianity,

    footnote: "One would go mad if one took the Bible seriously; but to take it seriously one must be already mad." -- "Crowley."

if one really thought that the majority of mankind was doomed to eternal punishment, one would go raving about the world trying to "save" people. Sleep would not be possible until the horror of the mind left the body exhausted. Otherwise, one must be morally insane. Which of us can sleep if one we love is in danger of mere death? We cannot even see a dog drown without at least interrupting all our business to look on. Who then can live in London and reflect upon the fact that of its seven million souls, all but about a thousand Plymouth Brethren will be damned? Yet the thousand Plymouth Brethren (who are the loudest in proclaiming that they will be the only ones saved) seem to get on very well, thank you. Whether they are hypocrites or morally insane is a matter which we can leave to their own consideration.

All these phantoms, of whatever nature, must be evoked, examined, and mastered; otherwise we may find that just when we want it there is some idea with which we have never dealt; and perhaps that idea, springing on us by surprise, and as it were from behind, may strangle us. This is the legend of the sorcerer strangled by the Devil!

GLOSSARY

ONLY words nowhere explained in the preceding pages are given in this list. Several others, mentioned in passing in the early part of the book, are sufficiently dealt with later on. In these cases the references in the Index should be turned up.

A.'.A.'.
    The Great White Brotherhood which is giving this Method of Attainment to the world. See Equinox I. 
Adeptus Minor.
    A grade of adeptship. See Equinox III. 
Aethyrs.
    See Equinox V and VII. 
Aima.
    The Great Fertile Mother Nature. 
Ama.
    The Great Mother not yet fertile. 
Amoun.
    The God Amen = Zeus = Jupiter, etc., etc. 
Ankh.
    The Symbol of "Life." A form of the Rosy Cross. See Equinox III. 
Apophis.
    The Serpent-God who slew Osiris. See Equinox III. 
Babalon, Our Lady.
    See Equinox V, The Vision and Voice, 14th Aethyr.

Babe of the Abyss.
    See Equinox VIII, Temple of Solomon.

Bhagavadgita.
    Scared Hymn of India, translated by Sir Edwin Arnold in the "Song Celestial." 
Binah.
    Understanding, the 3rd "emanation" of the Absolute. 
Caduceus.
    The Wand of Mercury. See Equinox II and III. 
Chela.
    Pupil. 
Chesed.
    Mercy, the 4th "emanation" of the Absolute. 
Chokmah.
    Wisdom, the 2nd "emanation" of the Absolute. 
Choronzon.
    See Equinox V, The Vision and the Voice, 10th Aethyr. 
City of the Pyramids.
    See Equinox V, The Vision and the Voice, 14th Aethyr. 
Crux Ansata.
    Same as Ankh, q.v. 
Daath.
    Knowledge, child of Chokmah and Binah in one sense; in another, the home of Choronzon. 
Dhammapada.
    A sacred Buddhist book. 
Elemental Kings.
    See 777. 
Geburah.
    Strength, the 5th "emanation" of the Absolute. 
Gunas.
    Three principles. See Bhagadvadgita,{sic} 777, etc. 
Guru.
    Teacher. 
Hadit.
    See "Liber Legis," Equinox VII. Also "Liber 555." 
Hathayoga Pradipika.
    A book on physical training for spiritual purposes. 
Hod.
    Splendour, the 8th "emanation" of the Absolute. 
Kamma.
    Pali dialect of Karma, q.v. 
Karma.
    "That which is made," "The law of cause and effect." See "Science and Buddhism," Crowley, Coll. Works, Vol. II. 
Kether.
    The Crown, 1st "emanation" of the Absolute. 
Lao Tze.
    Great Chinese teacher, founder of Taoists. See Tao Teh "K"ing. 
Liber Legis.
    See Equinox VII for facsimile reproduction of MS. 
Lingam
    The Unity or Male Principle. But these have many symbols, e.g., sometimes Yoni is 0 or 3 and Lingam 2. 
Lingam-Yoni.
    A form of the Rosy Cross. 
Macrocosm.
    The great Universe, of which man is an exact image. 
Magus.
    A magician. Technically, also, a Master of the grade 9{degree} = 2{square}. 
See
    Equinox VII, "Liber I," and elsewhere. 
Mahalingam.
    See Lingam. Maha means great. 
Maha Sattipatthana.
    A mode of meditation. See "Science and Buddhism," Crowley, Coll. Works, Vol. II, for a full account. 
Malkah.
    A young girl. The "bride." The unredeemed soul. 
Malkuth.
    "The kingdom," 10th "emanation" of the Absolute. 
Mantrayoga.
    A practice to attain union with God by repetition of a sacred sentence. 
Master of the Temple.
    One of grade 8{degree} = 3{square}. Fully discussed in Equinox. 
Microcosm.
    Man, considered as an exact image of the Universe. 
Nephesch.
    The "animal soul" of man. 
Netzach.
    Victory, the 7th "emanation" of the Absolute. 
Nibbana.
    The state called, for want of a better name, annihilation. The final goal. 
Nirvana.
    See Nibbana. 
Nuit.
    See "Liber Legis." 
Paths.
    See 777, and Equinox II and elsewhere. 
Perdurabo, Frater.
    See Equinox I-X, "The Temple of Solomon the King." 
Prana.
    See "Raja Yoga." 
Qabalah.
    See "The tradition of secret wisdom of the Hebrews," Equinox V. 
Qliphoth.
    "Shells" or demons. The excrement of ideas. 
Ra-Hoor-Khuit.
    See "Liber Legis." 
Ruach.
    The intellect and other mental qualities. See 777, etc. 
Sahasrara Cakkra.
    "The Temple of Solomon the King." See Equinox IV. 
Sammasati.
    See "The training of the Mind," Equinox V, and "The Temple of Solomon," Equinox VIII. 
Also
    "Science and Buddhism," Crowley Coll. Works, Vol. II 
Sankhara.
    See "Science and Buddhism." 
Sanna.
    See "Science and Buddhism." 
Sephiroth.
    See "Temple of Solomon," Equinox V. 
Shin.
    "A tooth." Hebrew letter = Sh, corresponds to Fire and Spirit. 
Shiva Sanhita.
    A Hindu treatise on physical training for spiritual ends. 
Skandhas.
    See "Science and Buddhism." 
Tao.
    See Konx Om Pax, "Thien Tao." 777, etc. 
Tao Teh King.
    Chinese Classic of the Tao. 
Taro.
    See 777, Equinox III and VIII, etc., etc. 
Tau.
    A "cross," Hebrew letter = Th corresponds to ""Earth." See 777. 
Thaumiel.
    The demons corresponding to Kether. Two contending forces. 
Theosophist.
    A person who talks about Yoga, and does no work. 
Thoth.
    The Egyptian god of Speech, Magick, Wisdom. 
Tiphereth.
    "Beauty" or "Harmony," the 6th "emanation" of the Absolute. 
Typhon.
    The destroyer of Osiris. 
Udana.
    One of the imaginary "nerves" of Hindu pseudo-physiology." 
Vedana.
    See "Science and Buddhism," Crowley, Coll. Works, Vol. II. 
Vesica, Vesica Piscies.
    See Yoni. The oval formed by the intersection of the circles in Euclid I, 1. 
Virakam, Soror.
    A chela of Frater Perdurabo. 
Vrittis.
    "Impressions." 
Yesod.
    "Foundation," the ninth "emanation" of the Absolute. 
Yogi.
    One who seeks to attain "Union" (with God). A Hindu word corresponding to the Mohammedan word Fakir. 
Yoni.
    The Dyad, or Female Principle. See Lingam. 
Zohar.
    Splendour, a collection of books on the Qabalah. See "The Temple of Solomon the King," Equinox V. 

NOTICE
The A.'.A.'. is an organization whose heads have obtained by personal experience to the summit of this science. They have founded a system by which every one can equally attain, and that with an ease and speed which was previously impossible.

The first grade in Their system is that of
STUDENT.

A Student must possess the following books:

    The Equinox,
    777.
    Konx Om Pax.
    Collected Works of A. Crowley; Tannhauser, The Sword of Song, Time, Eleusis. 3 vols.
    Raja Yoga, by Swami Vivekananda.
    The Shiva Sanhita, or the Hathayoga Pradipika.
    The Tao Teh King and the writings of Kwang Tze: S.B.E. xxxix, xl.
    The Spiritual Guide, by Miguel de Molinos.
    Rituel et Dogme de la Haute Magie, by Eliphas Levi, or its translation by A. E. Waite.
    The Goetia of the Lemegeton of Solomon the King. 

These books should be well studied in any case in conjunction with the second part -- Magick -- of this Book IV.

Study of these books will give a thorough grounding in the intellectual side of Their system.

After three months the Student is examined in these books, and if his knowledge of them is found satisfactory, he may become a Probationer, receiving Liber LXI and the secret holy book, Liber LXV. The principal point of this grade is that the Probationer has a master appointed, whose experience can guide him in his work.

He may select any practices that he prefers, but in any case must keep an exact record, so that he may discover the relation of cause and effect in his working, and so that the A.'.A.'. may judge of his progress, and direct his further studies.

After a year of probation he may be admitted a Neophyte of the A.'.A.'., and receive the secret holy book Liber VII.

These are the principal instructions for practice which every probationer should follow out:

Libri E, A, O, III, XXX, CLXXV, CC, CCVI, CMXIII.

Magick in Theory and Practice by Aleister Crowley
1989 e.v. key entry and proof reading with re-format and
ASCII conversion 9/18/90 e.v. done by Bill Heidrick, T.G. of
O.T.O.
(further proof reading desirable)

   disk 1 of 4

Copyright (c) O.T.O.

O.T.O.
P.O.Box 430
Fairfax, CA  94930
USA

(415) 454-5176 ----  Messages only.


                      LIMITED LICENSE
  Except for notations added to the history of modification,
the text on this diskette down to the next row of asterisks
must accompany all copies made of this file.  In particular,
this paragraph and the copyright notice are not to be
deleted or changed on any copies or print-outs of this file.
With these provisos, anyone may copy this file for personal
use or research.  Copies may be made for others at
reasonable cost of copying and mailing only, no additional
charges may be added.

************************************************************
*************

Pages in the original are marked thus at the bottom:  {page
number}
Comments and notes not in the original are identified with
the initials of the source: AC note = Crowley note.   WEH
note = Bill Heidrick note, etc.
footnotes have been moved up to the point of citation in the
text and set off by <<... >> just before and after the note.

************************************************************
**************



            Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law






                               MAGICK

                           IN THEORY AND

                              PRACTICE


                                 by

                           The Master Therion

                            Aleister Crowley

             {Based on the Castle Books edition of New York}




                       HYMN TO PAN

   epsilon-phi-rho-iota-xi  epsilon-rho-omega-tau-iota  pi-
epsilon-rho-iota-alpha-rho-chi-eta-sigma  delta  alpha-nu-
epsilon-pi-tau-omicron-mu-alpha-nu
   iota-omega  iota-omega  pi-alpha-nu  pi-alpha-nu
   omega -pi-alpha-nu  pi-alpha-nu  alpha-lambda-iota-pi-
lambda-alpha-gamma-chi-tau-epsilon,  chi-upsilon-lambda-
lambda-alpha-nu-iota-alpha-sigma  chi-iota-omicron-nu-
omicron-chi-tau-upsilon-pi-omicron-iota
  pi-epsilon-tau-rho-alpha-iota-alpha-sigma  alpha-pi-
omicron  delta-epsilon-iota-rho-alpha-delta-omicron-sigma
phi-alpha-nu-eta-theta,  omega
  theta-epsilon-omega-nu  chi-omicron-rho-omicron-pi-omicron-
iota  alpha-nu-alpha-xi

                                              SOPH. AJ.


Thrill with lissome lust of the light,
O man! My man!
Come careering out of the night
Of Pan!  Io Pan!
Io Pan!  Io Pan! Come over the sea
From Sicily and from Arcady!
Roaming as Bacchus, with fauns and pards
And nymphs and satyrs for thy guards,
On a milk-white ass, come over the sea
To me, to me,
Come with Apollo in bridal dress
(Shepherdess and pythoness)
Come with Artemis, silken shod,
And wash thy white thigh, beautiful God,
In the moon of the woods, on the marble mount,
The dimpled dawn of the amber fount!
Dip the purple of passionate prayer
In the crimson shrine, the scarlet snare,
The soul that startles in eyes of blue           {V}
To watch thy wantonness weeping through
The tangled grove, the gnarled bole
Of the living tree that is spirit and soul
And body and brain --- come over the sea,
(Io Pan!  Io Pan!)
Devil or god, to me, to me,
My man! my man!
Come with trumpets sounding shrill
Over the hill!
Come with drums low muttering
From the spring!
Come with flute and come with pipe!
Am I not ripe?
I, who wait and writhe and wrestle
With air that hath no boughs to nestle
My body, weary of empty clasp,
Strong as a lion and sharp as an asp ---
Come, O come!
I am numb
With the lonely lust of devildom.
Thrust the sword through the galling fetter,
All-devourer, all-begetter;
Give me the sign of the Open Eye,
And the token erect of thorny thigh,
And the word of madness and mystery,
O Pan!  Io Pan!
Io Pan!  Io Pan Pan!  Pan Pan! Pan,
I am a man:
Do as thou wilt, as a great god can,
O Pan! Io Pan!
Io Pan!  Io Pan Pan!  I am awake
in the grip of the snake.
The eagle slashes with beak and claw;
The gods withdraw:
The great beasts come, Io Pan!  I am borne
To death on the horn
Of the Unicorn.
I am Pan!  Io Pan!  Io Pan Pan!  Pan!              {VI}
I am thy mate, I am thy man,
Goat of thy flock, I am gold, I am god,
Flesh to thy bone, flower to thy rod.
With hoofs of steel I race on the rocks
Through solstice stubborn to equinox.
And I rave; and I rape and I rip and I rend
Everlasting, world without end,
Mannikin, maiden, Maenad, man,
In the might of Pan.
Io Pan!  Io Pan Pan!  Pan!  Io Pan!


           -------------

           {VII}



{Illustration on page VIII described:
   This is the set of photos originally published facing
page 12 in EQUINOX I, 2 and titled there:  "The Signs of the
Grades."

These are arranged as ten panels:     * * * *
                                        * *
                                       *   *
                                         *
                                         *

   In this re-publication, the original half-tones have been
redone as line copy.  Each panel consists of an illustration
of a single human in a black Tau robe, barefoot with hood
completely closed over the face.  The hood displays a six-
pointed figure on the forehead --- presumably the radiant
eye of Horus of the A.'. A.'., but the rendition is too poor
in detail.  There is a cross pendant over the heart.  The
ten panels are numbered in black in the lower left corner.

The panels are identified by two columns of numbered
captions, 1 to 6 to the left and 7 to 10 to the right.  The
description is bottom to top and left to right:

"1. Earth: the god Set fighting."  Frontal figure. Rt. foot
pointed to the fore and angled slightly outward with weight
on ball of foot.  Lf. heel almost touching Rt. heel and foot
pointed left.  Arms form a diagonal with body, right above
head and in line with left at waist height.  Hands palmer
and open with fingers outstretched and together.  Head
erect.

"2. Air: The god Shu supporting the sky."  Frontal.  Heels
together and slightly angled apart to the front, flat on
floor.  Head down.  Arms angled up on either side of head
about head 1.5 ft. from head to wrist and crooked as if
supporting a ceiling just at head height with the finger
tips.  The palms face upward and the backs of the hands away
from the head.  Thumbs closed to side of palms.  Fingers
straight and together.

"3. Water: the goddess Auramoth." Same body and foot
position as #2, but head erect.  Arms are brought down over
the chest so that the thumbs touch above the heart and the
backs of the hands are to the front.  The fingers meet below
the heart, forming between thumbs and fingers the descending
triangle of water.

"4. Fire: the goddess Thoum-aesh-neith."  Frontal.  Head and
body like #3.  Arms are angled so that the thumbs meet in a
line over the brow.  Palmer side facing.  Fingers meet above
head, forming between thumbs and fingers the ascending
triangle of fire.

"5,6. Spirit: the rending and closing of the veil."  Head
erect in both.  #5 has the same body posture as #1, except
that the left and right feet are countercharged and flat on
the floor with the heels in contact.  Arms and hands are
crooked forward at shoulder level such that the hands appear
to  be clawing open a split veil --- hands have progressed
to a point that the forearms are invisible, being directly
pointed at the front.  Lower arms are flat and horizontal in
the plain of the image.
#6. has the same body posture as #1, feet in same position
as #5.  The arms are elbow down against abdomen, with hands
forward over heart in claws such that the knuckles are
touching.  Passing from #5 to #6 or vice versa is done by
motion of shoulders and rotation of wrists.  This is
different from the other sign of opening the veil, the Sign
of the Enterer, which is done with hands flat palm to palm
and then spread without rotation of wrists.

"7-10. The L V X signs."

"7. + Osiris slain --- the cross." Body and feet as in #2.
Head bowed.  Arms directly horizontal from the shoulders in
the plane of the image.  Hands with fingers together, thumbs
to side of palm and palmer side forward.  The tau shape of
the robe dominates the image.

"8. L Isis mourning --- the Svastica."  The body is in semi-
profile, head down slightly and facing right of photograph.
The arms, hands, legs and feet are positioned to define a
swastika.  Left foot flat, carrying weight and angled toward
the right of the photo.  Right foot toe down behind the
figure to the left in the photo.  Right upper arm due left
in photo and forearm vertical with fingers closed and
pointing upward. Left arm smoothly canted down to the right
of the panel, with fingers closed and pointed down.

"9. V Typhon --- the Trident."  Figure frontal and standing
on tip toe, toes forward and heels not touching.  Head back.
Arms angled in a "V" with the body to the top and outward in
the plain of the photo.  Fingers and thumbs as #7, but
continuing the lines of the arms.

"10. X Osiris risen --- the Pentagram."  Body and feet as in
#7.  Head directly frontal and level.  Arms crossed over
heart, right over left with hands extended, fingers closed
and thumb on side such that the palms rest on the two
opposite shoulders.}





                            INTRODUCTION


 "Epsilon-sigma-sigma-epsilon-alpha-iota  alpha-theta-alpha-
nu-alpha-tau-omicron-sigma  theta-epsilon-omicron-sigma,
alpha-mu-beta-rho-omicron-tau-omicron-sigma,  omicron-
upsilon-chi  epsilon-tau-iota  theta-nu-eta-tau-omicron-
sigma
 Pythagoras.

   "Magic is the Highest, most Absolute, and most Divine
Knowledge of Natural Philosophy, advanced in its works and
wonderful operations by a right understanding of the inward
and occult virtue of things; so that true Agents being
applied to proper Patients, strange and admirable effects
will thereby be produced.  Whence magicians are profound and
diligent searchers into Nature; they, because of their
skill, know how to anticipate an effect, the which to the
vulgar shall seem to be a miracle."

                 "The Goetia of the Lemegeton of King
Solomon."

 "Wherever sympathetic magic occurs in its pure
unadulterated form, it is assumed that in nature one event
follows another necessarily and invariably without the
intervention of any spiritual or personal agency.
   Thus its fundamental conception is identical with that of
modern science; underlying the whole system is a faith,
implicit but real and firm, in the order and uniformity of
nature.  The magician does not doubt that the same causes
will always produce the same effects, that the performance
of the proper ceremony accompanied by the appropriate spell,
will inevitably be attended by the desired results, unless,
indeed, his incantations should chance to be thwarted and
foiled by the more potent charms of another sorcerer.  He
supplicates no higher power: he sues the favour of no fickle
and wayward being: he abases himself before no awful deity.
Yet his power, great as he believes it to be, is by no means
arbitrary and unlimited.  He can wield it only so long as he
strictly conforms to the rules of his art, or to what may be
called the laws of nature as conceived by {IX} him.  To
neglect these rules, to break these laws in the smallest
particular is to incur failure, and may even expose the
unskilful practitioner himself to the utmost peril.  If he
claims a sovereignty over nature, it is a constitutional
sovereignty rigorously limited in its scope and exercised in
exact conformity with ancient usage.  Thus the analogy
between the magical and the scientific conceptions of the
world is close.  In both of them the succession of events is
perfectly regular and certain, being determined by immutable
laws, the operation of which can be foreseen and calculated
precisely; the elements of caprice, of chance, and of
accident are banished from the course of nature.  Both of
them open up a seemingly boundless vista of possibilities to
him who knows the causes of things and can touch the secret
springs that set in motion the vast and intricate mechanism
of the world.  Hence the strong attraction which magic and
science alike have exercised on the human mind; hence the
powerful stimulus that both have given to the pursuit of
knowledge.  They lure the weary enquirer, the footsore
seeker, on through the wilderness of disappointment in the
present by their endless promises of the future: they take
him up to he top of an exceeding high mountain and shew him,
beyond the dark clouds and rolling mists at his feet, a
vision of the celestial city, far off, it may be, but
radiant with unearthly splendour, bathed in the light of
dreams."

 Dr. J. G. FRAZER, "The Golden Bough"."

   "So far, therefore, as the public profession of magic has
been one of the roads by which men have passed to supreme
power, it has contributed to emancipate mankind from the
thraldom of tradition and to elevate them into a larger,
freer life, with a broader outlook on the world.  This is no
small service rendered to humanity.  And when we remember
further that in another direction magic has paved the way
for science, we are forced to admit that if the black art
has done much evil, it has also been the source of much
good; that if it is the child of error, it has yet been the
mother of freedom and truth."

 Ibid.
{X}

   "Prove all things; hold fast that which is good."

 St. Paul.

  "Also the mantras and spells; the obeah and the wanga; the
work of the wand and the work of the sword; these he shall
learn and teach."
  "He must teach; but he may make severe the ordeals."
  "The word of the Law is  Theta-epsilon-lambda-eta-mu-
alpha."

                  LIBER AL vel xxxi: The Book of the Law.


                        -------------


 This book is for

                             ALL:
for every man, woman, and child.
   My former work has been misunderstood, and its scope
limited, by my use of technical terms.  It has attracted
only too many dilettanti and eccentrics, weaklings seeking
in "Magic" an escape from reality.  I myself was first
consciously drawn to the subject in this way.  And it has
repelled only too many scientific and practical minds, such
as I most designed to influence.
   But
                             MAGICK
is for
                              ALL.
   I have written this book to help the Banker, the
Pugilist, the Biologist, the Poet, the Navvy, the Grocer,
the Factory Girl, the Mathematician, the Stenographer, the
Golfer, the Wife, the Consul --- and all the rest --- to
fulfil themselves perfectly, each in his or her own proper
function.
   Let me explain in a few words how it came about that I
blazoned the word
                            MAGICK
upon the Banner that I have borne before me all my life.
   Before I touched my teens, I was already aware that I was
THE BEAST whose number is 666.  I did not understand in the
least {XI} what that implied; it was a passionately ecstatic
sense of identity.
   In my third year at Cambridge, I devoted myself
consciously to the Great Work, understanding thereby the
Work of becoming a Spiritual Being, free from the
constraints, accidents, and deceptions of material
existence.
   I found myself at a loss for a name to designate my work,
just as H. P. Blavatsky some years earlier. "Theosophy",
"Spiritualism", "Occultism", "Mysticism", all involved
undesirable connotations.
   I chose therefore the name.
                           "MAGICK"
as essentially the most sublime, and actually the most
discredited, of all the available terms.
   I swore to rehabilitate
                            MAGICK
to identify it with my own career; and to compel mankind to
respect, love, and trust that which they scorned, hated and
feared.  I have kept my Word.
   But the time is now come for me to carry my banner into
the thick of the press of human life.
   I must make
                             MAGICK
the essential factor in the life of
                             ALL.
   In presenting this book to the world, I must then explain
and justify my position by formulating a definition of
                             MAGICK
and setting forth its main principles in such a way that
                             ALL
may understand instantly that their souls, their lives, in
every relation with every other human being and every
circumstance, depend upon
                             MAGICK
and the right comprehension and right application thereof.

I. "DEFINITION."

                            MAGICK
is the Science and Art of causing Change to occur in
conformity with Will.

{XII}

   (Illustration: It is my Will to inform the World of
certain facts within my knowledge.  I therefore take
"magical weapons", pen, ink, and paper; I write
"incantations" --- these sentences --- in the "magical
language" i.e. that which is understood by the people I wish
to instruct; I call forth "spirits", such as printers,
publishers, booksellers, and so forth, and constrain them to
convey my message to those people.  The composition and
distribution of this book is thus an act of
                             MAGICK
by which I cause changes to take place in conformity with my
Will<<By "Intentional" I mean "willed".  But even
unintentional acts so-seeming are not truly so.  Thus,
breathing is an act of the Will-to-Live.>>)

II. "POSTULATE."

   ANY required Change may be effected by the application of
the proper kind and degree of force in the proper manner
through the proper medium to the proper object.
   (Illustration: I wish to prepare an ounce of Chloride of
Gold.  I must take the right kind of acid, nitro-
hydrochloric and no other, in sufficient quantity and of
adequate strength, and place it, in a vessel which will not
break, leak, or corrode, in such a manner as will not
produce undesirable results, with the necessary quantity of
Gold: and so forth.  Every Change has its own conditions.
   In the present state of our knowledge and power some
changes are not possible in practice; we cannot cause
eclipses, for instance, or transform lead into tin, or
create men from mushrooms.  But it is theoretically possible
to cause in any object any change of which that object is
capable by nature; and the conditions are covered by the
above postulate.)

III. "THEOREMS."

 (1) Every intentional act is a Magical Act.<<In one sense
Magick may be defined as the name given to Science
by the vulgar.>>
   (Illustration: See "Definition" above.)
{XIII}
   (2) Every successful act has conformed to the postulate.
   (3) Every failure proves that one or more requirements of
the postulate have not been fulfilled.
 (Illustrations: There may be failure to understand the
case; as when a doctor makes a wrong diagnosis, and his
treatment injures his patient.  There may be failure to
apply the right kind of force, as when a rustic tries to
blow out an electric light.  There may be failure to apply
the right degree of force, as when a wrestler has his hold
broken.  There may be failure to apply the force in the
right manner, as when one presents a cheque at the wrong
window of the Bank.  There may be failure to employ the
correct medium, as when Leonardo da Vinci found his
masterpiece fade away.  The force may be applied to an
unsuitable object, as when one tries to crack a stone,
thinking it a nut.)
   (4) The first requisite for causing any change is through
qualitative and quantitative understanding of the
conditions.
   (Illustration: The most common cause of failure in life
is ignorance of one's own True Will, or of the means by
which to fulfil that Will.  A man may fancy himself a
painter, and waste his life trying to become one; or he may
be really a painter, and yet fail to understand and to
measure the difficulties peculiar to that career.)
   (5) The second requisite of causing any change is the
practical ability to set in right motion the necessary
forces.
   (Illustration: A banker may have a perfect grasp of a
given situation, yet lack the quality of decision, or the
assets, necessary to take advantage of it.)
   (6) "Every man and every woman is a star."  That is to
say, every human being is intrinsically an independent
individual with his own proper character and proper motion.
 (7) Every man and every woman has a course, depending
partly on the self, and partly on the environment which is
natural and necessary for each.  Anyone who is forced from
his own course, either through not understanding himself, or
through external opposition, comes into conflict with the
order of the Universe, and suffers accordingly.    {XIV}
   (Illustration: A man may think it his duty to act in a
certain way, through having made a fancy picture of himself,
instead of investigating his actual nature.  For example, a
woman may make herself miserable for life by thinking that
she prefers love to social consideration, or "vice versa".
One woman may stay with an unsympathetic husband when she
would really be happy in an attic with a lover, while
another may fool herself into a romantic elopement when her
only true pleasures are those of presiding at fashionable
functions.  Again, a boy's instinct may tell him to go to
sea, while his parents insists on his becoming a doctor.  In
such a case, he will be both unsuccessful and unhappy in
medicine.)
   (8) A Man whose conscious will is at odds with his True
Will is wasting his strength.  He cannot hope to influence
his environment efficiently.
   (Illustration: When Civil War rages in a nation, it is in
no condition to undertake the invasion of other countries.
A man with cancer employs his nourishment alike to his own
use and to that of the enemy which is part of himself.  He
soon fails to resist the pressure of his environment.  In
practical life, a man who is doing what his conscience tells
him to be wrong will do it very clumsily.  At first!)
   (9) A man who is doing this True Will has the inertia of
the Universe to assist him.
   (Illustration: The first principle of success in
evolution is that the individual should be true to his own
nature, and at the same time adapt himself to his
environment.)
   (10) Nature is a continuous phenomenon, though we do not
know in all cases how things are connected.
   (Illustration: Human consciousness depends on the
properties of protoplasm, the existence of which depends on
innumerable physical conditions peculiar to this planet; and
this planet is determined by the mechanical balance of the
whole universe of matter.  We may then say that our
consciousness is causally connected with the remotest
galaxies; yet we do not know even how it arises from --- or
with --- the molecular changes in the brain.)
  (11) Science enables us to take advantage of the
continuity of Nature by the empirical application of certain
{XV} principles whose interplay involves different orders of
idea connected with each other in a way beyond our present
comprehension.
   (Illustration: We are able to light cities by rule-of-
thumb methods.  We do not know what consciousness is, or how
it is connected with muscular action; what electricity is or
how it is connected with the machines that generate it; and
our methods depend on calculations involving mathematical
ideas which have no correspondence in the Universe as we
know it.<<For instance, "irrational", "unreal", and
"infinite" expressions.>>)
   (12) Man is ignorant of the nature of his own being and
powers.  Even his idea of his limitations is based on
experience of the past, and every step in his progress
extends his empire.  There is therefore no reason to assign
theoretical limits<<i.e., except --- possibly --- in the
case of logically absurd questions, such as the Schoolmen
discussed in connection with "God".>> to what he may be, or
to what he may do.
   (Illustration: A generation ago it was supposed
theoretically impossible that man should ever know the
chemical composition of the fixed stars.  It is known that
our senses are adapted to receive only an infinitesimal
fraction of the possible rates of vibration.  Modern
instruments have enabled us to detect some of these
suprasensibles by indirect methods, and even to use their
peculiar qualities in the service of man, as in the case of
the rays of Hertz and Rontgen.  As Tyndall said, man might
at any moment learn to perceive and utilise vibrations of
all conceivable and inconceivable kinds.  The question of
Magick is a question of discovering and employing hitherto
unknown forces in nature.  We know that they exist, and we
cannot doubt the possibility of mental or physical
instruments capable of bringing us into relation with them.)
   (13) Every man is more or less aware that his
individuality  comprises several orders of existence, even
when he maintains that his subtler principles are merely
symptomatic of the changes in his gross vehicle.  A similar
order may be assumed to extend throughout nature.
   (Illustration: One does not confuse the pain of toothache
with {XVI} the decay which causes it.  Inanimate objects are
sensitive to certain physical forces, such as electrical and
thermal conductivity; but neither in us nor in them --- so
far as we know --- is there any direct conscious perception
of these forces.  Imperceptible influences are therefore
associated with all material phenomena; and there is no
reason why we should not work upon matter through those
subtle energies as we do through their material bases.  In
fact, we use magnetic force to move iron, and solar
radiation to reproduce images.)
   (14) Man is capable of being, and using, anything which
he perceives, for everything that he perceives is in a
certain sense a part of his being.  He may thus subjugate
the whole Universe of which he is conscious to his
individual Will.
   (Illustration: Man has used the idea of God to dictate
his personal conduct, to obtain power over his fellow, to
excuse his crimes, and for innumerable other purposes,
including that of realizing himself as God.  He has used the
irrational and unreal conceptions of mathematics to help him
in the construction of mechanical devices.  He has used his
moral force to influence the actions even of wild animals.
He has employed poetic genius for political purposes.)
   (15) Every force in the Universe is capable of being
transformed into any other kind of force by using suitable
means.  There is thus an inexhaustible supply of any
particular kind of force that we may need.
   (Illustration: Heat may be transformed into light and
power by using it to drive dynamos.  The vibrations of the
air may be used to kill men by so ordering them in speech as
to inflame war-like passions.  The hallucinations connected
with the mysterious energies of sex result in the
perpetuation of the species.)
   (16) The application of any given force affects all the
orders of being which exist in the object to which it is
applied, whichever of those orders is directly affected.
 (Illustration: If I strike a man with a dagger, his
consciousness, not his body only, is affected by my act;
although the dagger, as such, has no direct relation
therewith.  Similarly, the power of {XVII} my thought may so
work on the mind of another person as to produce far-
reaching physical changes in him, or in others through him.)
   (17) A man may learn to use any force so as to serve any
purpose, by taking advantage of the above theorems.
   (Illustration: A man may use a razor to make himself
vigilant over his speech, but using it to cut himself
whenever he unguardedly utters a chosen word.  He may serve
the same purpose by resolving that every incident of his
life shall remind him of a particular thing, making every
impression the starting point of a connected series of
thoughts ending in that thing.  He might also devote his
whole energies to some one particular object, by resolving
to do nothing at variance therewith, and to make every act
turn to the advantage of that object.)
   (18) He may attract to himself any force of the Universe
by making himself a fit receptacle for it, establishing a
connection with it, and arranging conditions so that its
nature compels it to flow toward him.
   (Illustration: If I want pure water to drink, I dig a
well in a place where there is underground water; I prevent
it from leaking away; and I arrange to take advantage of
water's accordance with the laws of Hydrostatics to fill
it.)
   (19) Man's sense of himself as separate from, and oppose
to, the Universe is a bar to his conducting its currents.
It insulates him.
   (Illustration: A popular leader is most successful when
he forgets himself, and remembers only "The Cause".  Self-
seeking engenders jealousies and schism.  When the organs of
the body assert their presence otherwise than by silent
satisfaction, it is a sign that they are diseased.  The
single exception is the organ of reproduction.  Yet even in
this case its self-assertion bears witness to its
dissatisfaction with itself, since it cannot fulfil its
function until completed by its counterpart in another
organism.
   (20) Man can only attract and employ the forces for which
he is really fitted.
 (Illustration:  You cannot make a silk purse out of a sow's
ear.  A {XVIII} true man of science learns from every
phenomenon.  But Nature is dumb to the hypocrite; for in her
there is nothing false.<<It is no objection that the
hypocrite is himself part of Nature.  He is an "endothermic"
product, divided against himself, with a tendency to break
up.  He will see his own qualities everywhere, and thus
obtain a radical misconception of phenomena.  Most religions
of the past have failed by expecting Nature to conform with
their ideals of proper conduct.>>)
   (21) There is no limit to the extent of the relations of
any man with the Universe in essence; for as soon as man
makes himself one with any idea the means of measurement
cease to exist.  But his power to utilize that force is
limited by his mental power and capacity, and by the
circumstances of his human environment.
   (Illustration: When a man falls in love, the whole world
becomes, to him, nothing but love boundless and immanent;
but his mystical state is not contagious; his fellow-men are
either amused or annoyed.  He can only extend to others the
effect which his love has had upon himself by means of his
mental and physical qualities.  Thus, Catullus, Dante and
Swinburn made their love a mighty mover of mankind by virtue
of their power to put their thoughts on the subject in
musical and eloquent language.  Again, Cleopatra and other
people in authority moulded the fortunes of many other
people by allowing love to influence their political
actions.  The Magician, however well he succeed in making
contact with the secret sources of energy in nature, can
only use them to the extent permitted by his intellectual
and moral qualities.  Mohammed's intercourse with Gabriel
was only effective because of his statesmanship,
soldiership, and the sublimity of his command of Arabic.
Hertz's discovery of the rays which we now use for wireless
telegraphy was sterile until reflected through the minds and
wills of the people who could take his truth, and transmit
it to the world of action by means of mechanical and
economic instruments.)
   (22) every individual is essentially sufficient to
himself.  But he is unsatisfactory to himself until he has
established himself in his right relation with the Universe.
   (Illustration: A microscope, however perfect, is useless
in the {XIX} hands of savages.  A poet, however sublime,
must impose himself upon his generation if he is to enjoy
(and even to understand) himself, as theoretically should be
the case.)
   (23) Magick is the Science of understanding oneself and
one's conditions.  It is the Art of applying that
understanding in action.
   (Illustration: A golf club is intended to move a special
ball in a special way in special circumstances.  A Niblick
should rarely be used on the tee, or a Brassie under the
bank of a bunker.  But also, the use of any club demands
skill and experience.)
   (24) Every man has an indefeasible right to be what he
is.
   (Illustration: To insist that any one else shall comply
with one's own standards is to outrage, not only him, but
oneself, since both parties are equally born of necessity.)
 (25) Every man must do Magick each time that he acts or
even thinks, since a thought is an internal act whose
influence ultimately affects action, thought it may not do
so at the time.
   (Illustration: The least gesture causes a change in a
man's own body and in the air around him; it disturbs the
balance of the entire Universe, and its effects continue
eternally throughout all space.  Every thought, however
swiftly suppressed, has its effect on the mind.  It stands
as one of the causes of every subsequent thought, and tends
to influence every subsequent action.  A golfer may lose a
few yards on his drive, a few more with his second and
third, he may lie on the green six bare inches too far from
the hole; but the net result of these trifling mishaps is
the difference of a whole stroke, and so probably between
halving and losing the hole.)
   (26) Every man has a right, the right of self-
preservation, to fulfil himself to the utmost.<<Men of
"criminal nature" are simply at issue with their true Wills.
The murderer has the Will-to-Live; and his will to murder is
a false will at variance with his true Will, since he risks
death at the hands of Society by obeying his criminal
impulse.>>
   (Illustration: A function imperfectly preformed injures,
not {XX} only itself, but everything associated with it.  If
the heart is afraid to beat for fear of disturbing the
liver, the liver is starved for blood, and avenges itself on
the heart by upsetting digestion, which disorders
respiration, on which cardiac welfare depends.)
   (27) Every man should make Magick the keynote of his
life.  He should learn its laws and live by them.
   (Illustration: The Banker should discover the real
meaning of his existence, the real motive which led him to
choose that profession.  He should understand banking as a
necessary factor in the economic existence of mankind,
instead of as merely a business whose objects are
independent of the general welfare.  He should learn to
distinguish false values from real, and to act not on
accidental fluctuations but on considerations of essential
importance.  Such a banker will prove himself superior to
others; because he will not be an individual limited by
transitory things, but a force of Nature, as impersonal,
impartial and eternal as gravitation, as patient and
irresistible as the tides.  His system will not be subject
to panic, any more than the law of Inverse Squares is
disturbed by Elections.  He will not be anxious about his
affairs because they will not be his; and for that reason he
will be able to direct them with the calm, clear-headed
confidence of an onlooker, with intelligence unclouded by
self-interest and power unimpaired by passion.)
   (28) Every man has a right to fulfil his own will without
being afraid that it may interfere with that of others; for
if he is in his proper place, it is the fault of others if
they interfere with him.
 (Illustration: If a man like Napoleon were actually
appointed by destiny to control Europe, he should not be
blamed for exercising his rights.  To oppose him would be an
error.  Any one so doing would have made a mistake as to his
own destiny, except in so far as it might be necessary for
him to learn to lessons of defeat.  The sun moves in space
without interference.  The order of Nature provides an orbit
for each star.  A clash proves that one or the other has
strayed from his course.  But as to each man that keeps his
true course, the more firmly he acts, the less likely are
others to get in his way.  His example will help {XXI} them
to find their own paths and pursue them.  Every man that
becomes a Magician helps others to do likewise.  The more
firmly and surely men move, and the more such action is
accepted as the standard of morality, the less will conflict
and confusion hamper humanity.)

                           --------------

 I hope that the above principles will demonstrate to
                               ALL
that their welfare, their very existence, is bound up in
                                MAGICK.
I trust that they will understand, not only the
reasonableness, but the necessity of the fundamental truth
which I was the means of giving to mankind:
   "Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law."
I trust that they will assert themselves as individually
absolute, that they will grasp the fact that it is their
right to assert themselves, and to accomplish the task for
which their nature fits them.  Yea, more, that this is their
duty, and that not only to themselves but to others, a duty
founded upon universal necessity, and not to be shirked on
account of any casual circumstances of the moment which may
seem to put such conduct in the light of inconvenience or
even of cruelty.
   I hope that the principles outlined above will help them
to understand this book, and prevent them from being
deterred from its study by the more or less technical
language in which it is written.
   The essence of
                          MAGICK
is simple enough in all conscience.  It is not otherwise
with the art of government.  The Aim is simply prosperity;
but the theory is tangled, and the practice beset with
briars.
   In the same way
                          MAGICK
is merely to be and to do.  I should add: "to suffer".  For
Magick is the verb; and it is part of the Training to use
the passive voice.  This is, however, a matter of Initiation
rather than of Magick in {XXII} its ordinary sense.  It is
not my fault if being is baffling, and doing desperate!
   Yet, once the above principles are firmly fixed in the
mind, it is easy enough to sum up the situation very
shortly.  One must find out for oneself, and make sure
beyond doubt, "who" one is, "what" one is, "why" one is.
This done, one may put the will which is implicit in the
"Why" into words, or rather into One Word.  Being thus
conscious of the proper course to pursue, the next thing is
to understand the conditions necessary to following it out.
After that, one must eliminate from oneself every element
alien or hostile to success, and develop those parts of
oneself which are specially needed to control the aforesaid
conditions.
   Let us make an analogy.  A nation must become aware of
its own character before it can be said to exist.  From that
knowledge it must divine its destiny.  It must then consider
the political conditions of the world; how other countries
may help it or hinder it.  It must then destroy it itself
any elements discordant with its destiny.  Lastly, it must
develop in itself those qualities which will enable it to
combat successfully the external conditions which threaten
to oppose is purpose.  We have had a recent example in the
case of the young German Empire, which, knowing itself and
its will, disciplined and trained itself so that it
conquered the neighbours which had oppressed it for so many
centuries.  But after 1866 and 1870, 1914!  It mistook
itself for superhuman, it willed a thing impossible, it
failed to eliminate its own internal jealousies, it failed
to understand the conditions of victory,<<At least, it
allowed England to discover its intentions, and so to
combine the world against it. {WEH NOTE: This footnote in
Crowley's text belongs to this page, but it is not marked in
the text.  I have assigned it this tentative point, as
following the general context.>> it did not train itself to
hold the sea, and thus, having violated every principle of
                           MAGICK,
it was pulled down and broken into pieces by provincialism
and democracy, so that neither individual excellence nor
civic virtue has yet availed to raise it again to that
majestic unity which made so bold a bid for the mastery of
the race of man.
   The sincere student will discover, behind the symbolic
technicalities of his book, a practical method of making
himself a {XXIII} Magician.  The processes described will
enable him to discriminate between what he actually is, and
what he has fondly imagined himself to be<<Professor Sigmund
Freud and his school have, in recent years, discovered a
part of this body of Truth, which has been taught for many
centuries in the Sanctuaries of Initiation.  But failure to
grasp the fullness of Truth, especially that implied in my
Sixth Theorem (above) and its corollaries, has led him and
his followers into the error of admitting that the avowedly
suicidal "Censor" is the proper arbiter of conduct.
Official psycho-analysis is therefore committed to upholding
a fraud, although the foundation of the science was the
observation of the disastrous effects on the individual of
being false to his Unconscious Self, whose "writing on the
wall" in dream language is the record of the sum of the
essential tendencies of the true nature of the individual.
The result has been that psycho-analysts have misinterpreted
life, and announced the absurdity that every human being is
essentially an anti-social, criminal, and insane animal.  It
is evident that the errors of the Unconscious of which the
psycho-analysts complain are neither more nor less than
the"original sin" of the theologians whom they despise so
heartily.>>.  He must behold his soul in all its awful
nakedness, he must not fear to look on that appalling
actuality.  He must discard the gaudy garments with which
his shame has screened him; he must accept the fact that
nothing can make him anything but what he is.  He may lie to
himself, drug himself, hide himself; but he is always there.
Magick will teach him that his mind is playing him traitor.
It is as if a man were told that tailors' fashion-plates
were the canon of human beauty, so that he tried to make
himself formless and featureless like them, and shuddered
with horror at the idea of Holbein making a portrait of him.
Magick will show him the beauty and majesty of the self
which he has tried to suppress and disguise.
   Having discovered his identity, he will soon perceive his
purpose.  Another process will show him how to make that
purpose pure and powerful.  He may then learn how to
estimate his environment, learn how to make allies, how to
make himself prevail against all powers whose error has
caused them to wander across his path.
   In the course of this Training, he will learn to explore
the Hidden Mysteries of Nature, and to develop new senses
and faculties in himself, whereby he may communicate with,
and control, Beings and Forces pertaining to orders of
existence which {XXIV} have been hitherto inaccessible to
profane research, and available only to that unscientific
and empirical
                           MAGICK
(of tradition) which I came to destroy in order that I might
fulfil.
   I send this book into the world that every man and woman
may take hold of life in the proper manner.  It does not
matter of one's present house of flesh be the hut of a
shepherd; by virtue of my
                           MAGICK
he shall be such a shepherd as David was.  If it be the
studio of a sculptor, he shall so chisel from himself the
marble that masks his idea that he shall be no less a master
than Rodin.
   Witness mine hand:
    Tau-Omicron  Mu-Epsilon-Gamma-Alpha  Theta-Eta-Rho-Iota-
Omicron-Nu (Taw-Resh-Yod-Vau-Nunfinal ): The Beast 666;
MAGUS 9 Degree = 2Square A.'. A.'. who is The Word of the
Aeon THELEMA; whose name is called V.V.V.V.V. 8 Degree =
3Square A.'. A.'. in the City of the Pyramids; OU MH 7
Degree = 4Square A.'. A.'.; OL SONUF VAORESAGI 6 Degree =
5Square, and ... ... 5 Degree = 6Square A.'. A.'. in the
Mountain of Abiegnus: but FRATER PERDURABO in the Outer
Order or the A.'. A.'. and in the World of men upon the
Earth, Aleister Crowley of Trinity College, Cambridge.



                            -----------


                              {XXV}





                               CONTENTS

                               -------


 (This portion of the Book should be studied in connection
with its Parts I. and II.)
0           The Magical Theory of the Universe.
I           The Principles of Ritual.
II          The Formulae of the Elemental Weapons.
III         The Formula of Tetragrammaton.
IV          The Formula of Alhim: also that of Alim.
V           The Formula of I. A. O.
VI          The Formula of the Neophyte.
VII         The Formula of the Holy Graal, of Abrahadabra,
and of
                Certain Other Words; with some remarks on
the
                Magical Memory.
VIII        Of Equilibrium: and of the General and
Particular Method
                of Preparation of the Furniture of the
Temple and the
                Instruments of Art.
IX          Of Silence and Secrecy: and of the Barbarous
names of
                Evocation.
X           Of the Gestures.
XI          Of Our Lady BABALON and of The Beast whereon
                she rideth: also concerning Transformations.
XII         Of the Bloody Sacrifice and Matters Cognate.
XIII        Of the Banishings, and of the Purifications.
XIV         Of the Consecrations: with an Account of the
Nature and
                Nurture of the Magical Link.
XVI (1)     Of the Oath.
XV          Of the Invocation.
XVI (2)     Of the Charge to the Spirit: with some Account
of the
                Constrains and Curses occasionally
necessary.
XVII        Of the License to Depart.
XVIII       Of Clairvoyance: and of the Body of Light, its
Powers and
                its Development.  Also concerning
Divinations.
XIX         Of Dramatic Rituals.
XX          Of the Eucharist: and of the Art of Alchemy.
XXI         Of Black Magick: of the Main Types of the
Operations of
                Magick Art: and of the Powers of the Sphinx.

                              {XXVII}






                             CHAPTER 0

                THE MAGICAL THEORY OF THE UNIVERSE

   There are three main theories of the Universe; Dualism,
Monism and Nihilism.  It is impossible to enter into a
discussion of their relative merits in a popular manual of
this sort.  They may be studied in Erdmann's "History of
Philosophy" and similar treatises.
   All are reconciled and unified in the theory which we
shall now set forth.  The basis of this Harmony is given in
Crowley's
"Berashith" --- to which reference should be made.
   Infinite space is called the goddess NUIT, while the
infinitely small and atomic yet omnipresent point is called
HADIT.<<I present this theory in a very simple form.  I
cannot even explain (for instance) that an idea may not
refer to Being at all, but to Going.  The Book of the Law
demands special study and initiated apprehension.>>  These
are unmanifest.  One conjunction of these infinites is
called RA-HOOR-KHUIT,<<More correctly, HERU-RA-HA, to
include HOOR-PAAR-KRAAT.>> a unity which includes and heads
all things.<<The basis of this theology is given in Liber
CCXX, AL vel Legis which forms Part IV of this Book 4.
Hence I can only outline the matter in a very crude way; it
would require a separate treatise to discuss even the true
meaning of the terms employed, and to show how The Book of
the Law anticipates the recent discoveries of Frege, Cantor,
Poincare, Russell, Whitehead, Einstein and others.>>  (There
is also a particular Nature of Him, in certain conditions,
such as have obtained since the Spring of 1904, e.v.)  This
profoundly mystical conception {1} is based upon actual
spiritual experience, but the trained reason<<All advance in
understanding demands the acquisition of a new point-of-
view.  Modern conceptions of Mathematics, Chemistry, and
Physics are sheer paradox to the "plain man" who thinks of
Matter as something that one can knock up against.>> can
reach a reflection of this idea by the method of logical
contradiction which ends in reason transcending itself.  The
reader should consult "The Soldier and the Hunchback" in
Equinox I, I, and Konx Om Pax.
   "Unity" transcends "consciousness".  It is above all
division.  The Father of thought --- the Word --- is called
Chaos --- the dyad.  The number Three, the Mother, is called
Babalon.  In connection with this the reader should study
"The Temple of Solomon the King" in Equinox I, V, and Liber
418.
   This first triad is essentially unity, in a manner
transcending reason.  The comprehension of this Trinity is a
matter of spiritual experience.  All true gods are
attributed to this Trinity.<<Considerations of the Christian
Trinity are of a nature suited only to Initiates of the IX
Degree of O.T.O., as they enclose the final secret of all
practical Magick.>>
   An immeasurable abyss divides it from all manifestations
of Reason or the lower qualities of man.  In the ultimate
analysis of Reason, we find all reason identified with this
abyss.  Yet this abyss is the crown of the mind.  Purely
intellectual faculties all obtain here.  This abyss has no
number, for in it all is confusion.
   Below this abyss we find the moral qualities of Man, of
which there are six.  The highest is symbolised by the
number Four.  Its nature is fatherly<<Each conception is,
however, balanced in itself.  Four is also Daleth, the
letter of Venus; so that the mother-idea is included.
Again, the Sephira of 4 is Chesed, referred to Water.  4 is
ruled by Jupiter, Lord of the Lightning (Fire) yet ruler of
Air.  Each Sephira is complete in its way.>>; Mercy and
Authority are the attributes of its dignity.
   The number Five is balanced against it.  The attributes
of Five are Energy and Justice.  Four and Five are again
combined and harmonized in the number Six, whose nature is
beauty and harmony, mortality and immortality.
   In the number Seven the feminine nature is again
predominant, {2} but it is the masculine type of female, the
Amazon, who is balanced in the number Eight by the feminine
type of male.
   In the number Nine we reach the last of the purely mental
qualities.  It identifies change with stability.
   Pendant to this sixfold system is the number Ten<<
          The balance of the Sephiroth:
    Kether      (1)  "Kether is in Malkuth, and Malkuth is
in Kether, but
                       after another manner."
    Chokmah     (2)  is Yod of Tetragrammaton, and therefore
also Unity.
    Binah       (3)  is He of Tetragrammaton, and therefore
"The
                       Emperor."
    Chesed      (4)  is Daleth, Venus the female.
    Geburah     (5)  is the Sephira of Mars, the Male.
    Tiphereth   (6)  is the Hexagram, harmonizing, and
mediating between
                       Kether and Malkuth.  Also it reflects
Kether.  "That
                       which is above, is like that which is
below, and
                       that which is below, is like that
which is above."
    Netzach     (7)  and Hod (8) balanced as in text.
    Jesod       (9)  see text.
    Malkuth    (10)  contains all the numbers.>>
 which includes the whole of Matter as we know it by the
senses.
   It is impossible here to explain thoroughly the complete
conception; for it cannot be too clearly understood that
this is a "classification" of the Universe, that there is
nothing which is not comprehended therein.
   The Article on the Qabalah in Vol. I, No. V of the
Equinox is the best which has been written on the subject.
It should be deeply studied, in connection with the
Qabalistic Diagrams in Nos. II and III: "The Temple of
Solomon the King".
   Such is a crude and elementary sketch of this system.
   The formula of Tetragrammaton is the most important for
the practical magician.  Here Yod = 2, He = 3, Vau = 4 to 9,
He final = 10.
 The Number Two represents Yod, the Divine or Archetypal
World, and the Number One is only attained by the
destruction of the God and the Magician in Samadhi.  The
world of Angels is under the numbers Four to Nine, and that
of spirits under the {3} number Ten.<<It is not possible to
give a full account of the twenty-two "paths" in this
condensed sketch.  They should be studied in view of all
their attributes in 777, but more especially that in which
they are attributed to the planets, elements and signs, as
also to the Tarot Trumps, while their position on the Tree
itself and their position as links between the particular
Sephiroth which they join is the final key to their
understanding.  It will be noticed that each chapter of this
book is attributed to one of them.  This was not
intentional.  The book was originally but a collection of
haphazard dialogues between Fra. P. and Soror A.; but on
arranging the MSS, they fell naturally and of necessity into
this division.  Conversely, my knowledge of the Schema
pointed out to me numerous gaps in my  original exposition;
thanks to this, I have been able to make it a complete and
systematic treatise.  That is, when my laziness had been
jogged by the criticisms and suggestions of various
colleagues to whom I had submitted the early drafts.>>  All
these numbers are of course parts of the magician himself
considered as the microcosm.  The microcosm is an exact
image of the Macrocosm; the Great Work is the raising of the
whole man in perfect balance to the power of Infinity.
   The reader will remark that all criticism directed
against the Magical Hierarchy is futile.  One cannot call it
incorrect --- the only line to take might be that it was
inconvenient.  In the same way one cannot say that the Roman
alphabet is better or worse than the Greek, since all
required sounds can be more or less satisfactorily
represented by either; yet both these alphabets were found
so little satisfactory when it came to an attempt at
phonetic printing of Oriental languages, that the alphabet
had to be expanded by the use of italics and other
diacritical marks.  In the same way our magical alphabet of
the Sephiroth and the Paths (thirty-two letters as it were)
has been expanded into the four worlds corresponding to the
four letters of the name Yod-Heh-Vau-Heh; and each Sephira
is supposed to contain a Tree of Life of its own.  Thus we
obtain four hundred Sephiroth instead of the original ten,
and the Paths being capable of similar multiplications, or
rather of subdivision, the number is still further extended.
Of course this process might be indefinitely continued
without destroying the original system.
 The Apologia for this System is that our purest conceptions
{4}  are symbolized in Mathematics.  "God is the Great
Arithmetician."  "God is the Grand Geometer."  It is best
therefore to prepare to apprehend Him by formulating our
minds according to these measures.<<By "God" I here mean the
Ideal Identity of a man's inmost nature.  "Something
ourselves (I erase Arnold's imbecile and guilty 'not') that
makes for righteousness;" righteousness being rightly
defined as internal coherence.  (Internal Coherence implies
that which is written "Detegitur Yod.")>>
   To return, each letter of this alphabet may have its
special magical sigil.  The student must not expect to be
given a cut-and-dried definition of what exactly is meant by
any of all this.  On the contrary, he must work backwards,
putting the whole of his mental and moral outfit into these
pigeon-holes.  You would not expect to be able to buy a
filing cabinet with the names of all your past, present and
future correspondents ready indexed: your cabinet has a
system of letters and numbers meaningless in themselves, but
ready to take on a meaning to you, as you fill up the files.
As your business increased, each letter and number would
receive fresh accessions of meaning for you; and by adopting
this orderly arrangement you would be able to have a much
more comprehensive grasp of your affairs than would
otherwise be the case.  By the use of this system the
magician is able ultimately to unify the whole of his
knowledge --- to transmute, even on the Intellectual Plane,
the Many into the One.
   The Reader can now understand that the sketch given above
of the magical Hierarchy is hardly even an outline of the
real theory of the Universe.  This theory may indeed be
studied in the article already referred to in No. V of the
Equinox, and, more deeply in the Book of the Law and the
Commentaries thereon: but the true understanding depends
entirely upon the work of the Magician himself.  Without
magical experience it will be meaningless.
   In this there is nothing peculiar.  It is so with all
scientific knowledge.  A blind man might cram up astronomy
for the purpose of passing examinations, but his knowledge
would be {5} almost entirely unrelated to his experience,
and it would certainly not give him sight.  A similar
phenomenon is observed when a gentleman who has taken an
"honours degree" in modern languages at Cambridge arrives in
Paris, and is unable to order his dinner.  To exclaim
against the Master Therion is to act like a person who,
observing this, should attack both the professors of French
and the inhabitants of Paris, and perhaps go on to deny the
existence of France.
   Let us say, once again, that the magical language is
nothing but a convenient system of classification to enable
the magician to docket his experiences as he obtains them.
   Yet this is true also, that, once the language is
mastered, one can divine the unknown by study of the known,
just as one's knowledge of Latin and Greek enables one to
understand some unfamiliar English word derived from those
sources.  Also, there is the similar case of the Periodic
Law in Chemistry, which enables Science to prophesy, and so
in the end to discover, the existence of certain previously
unsuspected elements in nature.  All discussions upon
philosophy are necessarily sterile, since truth is beyond
language.  They are, however, useful if carried far enough -
-- if carried to the point when it become apparent that all
arguments are arguments in a circle.<<See "The Soldier and
the Hunchback," Equinox I, I.  The apparatus of human reason
is simply one particular system of coordinating impressions;
its structure is determined by the course of the evolution
of the species.  It is no more absolute than the evolution
of the species.  It is no more absolute than the mechanism
of our muscles is a complete type wherewith all other
systems of transmitting Force must conform.>>  But
discussions of the details of purely imaginary qualities are
frivolous and may be deadly.  For the great danger of this
magical theory is that the student may mistake the alphabet
for the things which the words represent.
   An excellent man of great intelligence, a learned
Qabalist, once amazed the Master Therion by stating that the
Tree of Life was the framework of the Universe.  It was as
if some one had seriously maintained that a cat was a
creature constructed by placing the letters C. A. T. in that
order.  It is no wonder that Magick has excited the ridicule
of the unintelligent, since even its {6} educated students
can be guilty of so gross a violation of the first
principles of common sense.<<Long since writing the above,
an even grosser imbecility has been perpetrated.  One who
ought to have known better tried to improve the Tree of Life
by turning the Serpent of Wisdom upside down!  Yet he could
not even make his scheme symmetrical: his little remaining
good sense revolted at the supreme atrocities.  Yet he
succeeded in reducing the whole Magical Alphabet to
nonsense, and shewing that he had never understood its real
meaning.
   The absurdity of any such disturbance of the arrangement
of the Paths is evident to any sober student from such
examples as the following.  Binah, the Supernal
Understanding, is connected with Tiphereth, the Human
Consciousness, by Zain, Gemini, the Oracles of the Gods, or
the Intuition.  That is, the attribution represents a
psychological fact: to replace it by The Devil is either
humour or plain idiocy.  Again, the card "Fortitude", Leo,
balances Majesty and Mercy with Strength and Severity: what
sense is there in putting "Death", the Scorpion, in its
stead?  There are twenty other mistakes in the new wonderful
illuminated-from-on-high attribution; the student can
therefore be sure of twenty more laughs if he cares to study
it.>>
   A synopsis of the grades of the A.'. A.'. as illustrative
of the Magical Hierarchy in Man is given in Appendix 2 "One
Star in Sight."  This should be read before proceeding with
the chapter.  The subject is very difficult.  To deal with
it in full is entirely beyond the limits of this small
treatise.

            "FURTHER CONCERNING THE MAGICAL UNIVERSE"
   All these letters of the magical alphabet --- referred to
above --- are like so many names on a map.  Man himself is a
complete microcosm.  Few other beings have this balanced
perfection.  Of course every sun, every planet, may have
beings similarly constituted.<<Equally, of course, we have
no means of knowing what we really are.  We are limited to
symbols.  And it is certain that all our sense-perceptions
give only partial aspects of their objects.  Sight, for
instance, tells us very little about solidity, weight,
composition, electrical character, thermal conductivity,
etc., etc.  It says nothing at all about the very existence
of such vitally important ideas as Heat, Hardness, and so
on.  The impression which the mind combines from the senses
can never claim to be accurate or complete.  We have indeed
learnt that nothing is in itself what it seems to be to
us.>>  But when we speak of dealing with the planets in
Magick, {7} the reference is usually not to the actual
planets, but to parts of the earth which are of the nature
attributed to these planets.  Thus, when we say that Nakhiel
is the "Intelligence" of the Sun, we do not mean that he
lives in the Sun, but only that he has a certain rank and
character; and although we can invoke him, we do not
necessarily mean that he exists in the same sense of the
word in which our butcher exists.
 When we "conjure Nakhiel to visible appearance," it may be
that our process resembles creation --- or, rather
imagination --- more nearly than it does calling-forth.  The
aura of a man is called the "magical mirror of the
universe"; and, so far as any one can tell, nothing exists
outside of this mirror.  It is at least convenient to
represent the whole as if it were subjective.  It leads to
less confusion.  And, as a man is a perfect microcosm,<<He
is this only by definition.  The universe may contain an
infinite variety of worlds inaccessible to human
apprehension.  Yet, for this very reason, they do not exist
for the purposes of the argument.  Man has, however, some
instruments of knowledge; we may, therefore, define the
Macrocosm as the totality of things possible to his
perception.  As evolution develops those instruments, the
Macrocosm and the Microcosm extend; but they always maintain
their mutual relation.  Neither can possess any meaning
except in terms of the other.  Our "discoveries" are exactly
as much of ourselves as they are of Nature.  America and
Electricity did, in a sense, exist before we were aware of
them; but they are even now no more than incomplete ideas,
expressed in symbolic terms of a series of relations between
two sets of inscrutable phenomena.>> it is perfectly easy to
re-model one's conception at any moment.
   Now there is a traditional correspondence, which modern
experiment has shown to be fairly reliable.  There is a
certain natural connexion between certain letters, words,
numbers, gestures, shapes, perfumes and so on, so that any
idea or (as we might call it) "spirit", may be composed or
called forth by the use of those things which are harmonious
with it, and express particular parts of its nature.  These
correspondences have been elaborately mapped in the Book 777
in a very convenient and compendious form.  It will be
necessary for the student to make a careful study of this
book in connexion with some actual rituals of Magick, for
example, {8} that of the evocation of Taphtatharath printed
in Equinox I, III, pages 170-190, where he will see exactly
why these things are to be used.  Of course, as the student
advances in knowledge by experience he will find a
progressive subtlety in the magical universe corresponding
to his own; for let it be said yet again! not only is his
aura a magical mirror of the universe, but the universe is a
magical mirror of his aura.
   In this chapter we are only able to give a very thin
outline of magical theory --- faint pencilling by weak and
wavering fingers --- for this subject may almost be said to
be co-extensive with one's whole knowledge.
   The knowledge of exoteric science is comically limited by
the fact that we have no access, except in the most indirect
way, to any other celestial body than our own.  In the last
few years, the semi-educated have got an idea that they know
a great deal about the universe, and the principal ground
for their fine opinion of themselves is usually the
telephone or the airship.  It is pitiful to read the
bombastic twaddle about progress, which journalists and
others, who wish to prevent men from thinking, put out for
consumption.  We know infinitesimally little of the material
universe.  Our detailed knowledge is so contemptibly minute,
that it is hardly worth reference, save that our shame may
spur us to increased endeavour.  Such knowledge<<Knowledge
is, moreover, an impossible conception.  All propositions
come ultimately back to "A is A".>> as we have got is of a
very general and abstruse, of a philosophical and almost
magical character.  This consists principally of the
conceptions of pure mathematics.  It is, therefore, almost
legitimate to say that pure mathematics is our link with the
rest of the universe and with "God".
   Now the conceptions of Magick are themselves profoundly
mathematical.  The whole basis of our theory is the Qabalah,
which corresponds to mathematics and geometry.  The method
of operation in Magick is based on this, in very much the
same way as the laws of mechanics are based on mathematics.
So far, therefore as we can be said to possess a magical
theory of the universe, it must be a matter solely of
fundamental law, with a {9} few simple and comprehensive
propositions stated in very general terms.
   I might expend a life-time in exploring the details of
one plane, just as an explorer might give his life to one
corner of Africa, or a chemist to one subgroup of compounds.
Each such detailed piece of work may be very valuable, but
it does not as a rule throw light on the main principles of
the universe.  Its truth is the truth of one angle.  It
might even lead to error, if some inferior person were to
generalize from too few facts.
   Imagine an inhabitant of Mars who wished to philosophise
about the earth, and had nothing to go by but the diary of
some man at the North Pole!  But the work of every explorer,
on whatever branch of the Tree of Life the caterpillar he is
after may happen to be crawling, is immensely helped by a
grasp of general principles.  Every magician, therefore,
should study the Holy Qabalah.  Once he has mastered the
main principles, he will find his work grow easy.
   "Solvitur ambulando" which does not mean: "Call the
Ambulance!"



                           --------------
     {10}





                              CHAPTER I

                      THE PRINCIPLES OF RITUAL.

 There is a single main definition of the object of all
magical Ritual.  It is the uniting of the Microcosm with the
Macrocosm.  The Supreme and Complete Ritual is therefore the
Invocation of the Holy Guardian Angel;<<See the "Book of the
Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage"; and Liber 418, 8th
Aethyr, Liber Samekh; see Appendix 3.>> or, in the language
of Mysticism, Union with God.<<The difference between these
operations is more of theoretical than of practical
importance.>>
   All other magical Rituals are particular cases of this
general principle, and the only excuse for doing them is
that it sometimes occurs that one particular portion of the
microcosm is so weak that its imperfection of impurity would
vitiate the Macrocosm of which it is the image, Eidolon, or
Reflexion.  For example, God is above sex; and therefore
neither man nor woman as such can be said fully to
understand, much less to represent, God.  It is therefore
incumbent on the male magician to cultivate those female
virtues in which he is deficient, and this task he must of
course accomplish without in any way impairing his virility.
It will then be lawful for a magician to invoke Isis, and
identify himself with her; if he fail to do this, his
apprehension of the Universe when he attains Samadhi will
lack the conception of maternity.  The result will be a
metaphysical and --- by corollary --- ethical limitation in
the Religion which he founds.  Judaism and Islam are
striking example of this failure.
   To take another example, the ascetic life which devotion
to {11} magick so often involves argues a poverty of nature,
a narrowness, a lack of generosity.  Nature is infinitely
prodigal --- not one in a million seeds ever comes to
fruition.  Whoso fails to recognise this, let him invoke
Jupiter.<<There are much deeper considerations in which it
appears that "Everything that is, is right".  They are set
forth elsewhere; we can only summarise them here by saying
that the survival of the fittest is their upshot.>>
   The danger of ceremonial magick --- the sublest and
deepest danger --- is this: that the magician will naturally
tend to invoke that partial being which most strongly
appeals to him, so that his natural excess in that direction
will be still further exaggerated.  Let him, before
beginning his Work, endeavour to map out his own being, and
arrange his invocations in such a way as to redress the
balance.<<The ideal method of doing this is given in Liber
913 (Equinox VII).  See also Liber CXI Aleph.>>  This, of
course, should have been done in a preliminary fashion
during the preparation of the weapons and furniture of the
Temple.
   To consider in a more particular manner this question of
the Nature of Ritual, we may suppose that he finds himself
lacking in that perception of the value of Life and Death,
alike of individuals and of races, which is characteristic
of Nature.  He has perhaps a tendency to perceive the "first
noble truth" uttered by Buddha, that Everything is sorrow.
Nature, it seems, is a tragedy.  He has perhaps even
experienced the great trance called Sorrow.  He should then
consider whether there is not some Deity who expresses this
Cycle, and yet whose nature is joy.  He will find what he
requires in Dionysus.
   There are three main methods of invoking any Deity.
   The "First Method" consists of devotion to that Deity,
and, being mainly mystical in character, need not be dealt
with in this place, especially as a perfect instruction
exists in Liber 175 ("See" Appendix).
   The "Second method"is the straight forward ceremonial
invocation.  It is the method which was usually employed in
the Middle Ages.  Its advantage is its directness, its
disadvantage its {12} crudity.  The "Goetia" gives clear
instruction in this method, and so do many other rituals,
white and black.  We shall presently devote some space to a
clear exposition of this Art.
   In the case of Bacchus, however, we may roughly outline
the procedure.  We find that the symbolism of Tiphareth
expresses the nature of Bacchus.  It is then necessary to
construct a Ritual of Tiphareth.  Let us open the Book 777;
we shall find in line 6 of each column the various parts of
our required apparatus.  Having ordered everything duly, we
shall exalt the mind by repeated prayers or conjurations to
the highest conception of the God, until, in one sense or
another of the word, He appears to us and floods our
consciousness with the light of His divinity.
   The "Third Method is the Dramatic," perhaps the most
attractive of all; certainly it is so to the artist's
temperament, for it appeals to his imagination through his
aesthetic sense.
   Its disadvantage lies principally in the difficulty of
its performance by a single person.  But it has the sanction
of the highest antiquity, and is probably the most useful
for the foundation of a religion.  It is the method of
Catholic Christianity, and consists in the dramatization of
the legend of the God.  The Bacchae of Euripides is a
magnificent example of such a Ritual; so also, through in a
less degree, is the Mass.  We may also mention many of the
degrees in Freemasonry, particularly the third.  The 5
Degree = 6Square Ritual published in No. III of the Equinox
is another example.
   In the case of Bacchus, one commemorates firstly his
birth of a mortal mother who has yielded her treasure-house
to the Father of All, of the jealousy and rage excited by
this incarnation, and of the heavenly protection afforded to
the infant.  Next should be commemorated the journeying
westward upon an ass.  Now comes the great scene of the
drama: the gentle, exquisite youth with his following
(chiefly composed of women) seems to threaten the
established order of things, and that Established Order
takes steps to put an end to the upstart.  We find Dionysus
confronting the angry King, not with defiance, but with
meekness; yet with a subtle confidence, an underlying
laughter.  His forehead is wreathed with vine tendrils.  He
is an effeminate figure with those broad leaves clustered
upon his brow?  But those leaves hide {13} horns.  King
Pentheus, representative of respectability,<<There is a much
deeper interpretation in which Pentheus is himself "The
Dying God".  See my "Good Hunting!" and Dr. J.G.Frazer's
"Golden Bough".>> is destroyed by his pride.  He goes out
into the mountains to attack the women who have followed
Bacchus, the youth whom he has mocked, scourged, and put in
chains, yet who has only smiled; and by those women, in
their divine madness, he is torn to pieces.
   It has already seemed impertinent to say so much when
Walter Pater has told the story with such sympathy and
insight.  We will not further transgress by dwelling upon
the identity of this legend with the course of Nature, its
madness, its prodigality, its intoxication, its joy, and
above all its sublime persistence through the cycles of Life
and Death.  The pagan reader must labour to understand this
in Pater's "Greek Studies", and the Christian reader will
recognise it, incident for incident, in the story of Christ.
This legend is but the dramatization of Spring.
   The magician who wishes to invoke Bacchus by this method
must therefore arrange a ceremony in which he takes the part
of Bacchus, undergoes all His trials, and emerges triumphant
from beyond death.  He must, however, be warned against
mistaking the symbolism.  In this case, for example, the
doctrine of individual immortality has been dragged in, to
the destruction of truth.  It is not that utterly worthless
part of man, his individual consciousness as John Smith,
which defies death --- that consciousness which dies and is
reborn in every thought.  That which persists (if anything
persist) is his real John Smithiness, a quality of which he
was probably never conscious in his life.<<See "The Book of
Lies", Liber 333, for several sermons to this effect.  Caps.
Alpha,  Delta,  Eta, Iota-Epsilon,  Iota-Sigma,  Iota-Eta,
Kappa-Alpha,  Kappa-Eta, in particular.  The reincarnation
of the Khu or magical Self is another matter entirely, too
abstruse to discuss in this elementary manual. {WEH NOTE: I
have made a correction in the above list of chapters from
Liber 333.  The published text cites  Iota-Digamma, which
does not exist.  The correct chapter is  Iota-Sigma, which
does exist and discusses the subject}.>>
   Even that does not persist unchanged.  It is always
growing.  The Cross is a barren stick, and the petals of the
Rose fall and decay; but in the union of the Cross and the
Rose is a constant {14} succession of new lives.<<See "The
Book of Lies", Liber 333, for several sermons to this
effect.  The whole theory of Death must be sought in Liber
CXI Aleph.>>  Without this union, and without this death of
the individual, the cycle would be broken.
   A chapter will be consecrated to removing the practical
difficulties of this method of Invocation.  It will
doubtless have been noted by the acumen of the reader that
in the great essentials these three methods are one.  In
each case the magician identifies himself with the Deity
invoked.  To "invoke" is to "call in", just as to "evoke" is
to "call forth".  This is the essential difference between
the two branches of Magick.  In invocation, the macrocosm
floods the consciousness.  In evocation, the magician,
having become the macrocosm, creates a microcosm.  You
"in"voke a God into the Circle.  You "e"voke a Spirit into
the Triangle.  In the first method identity with the God is
attained by love and by surrender, by giving up or
suppressing all irrelevant (and illusionary) parts of
yourself.  It is the weeding of a garden.
   In the second method identity is attained by paying
special attention to the desired part of yourself: positive,
as the first method is negative.  It is the potting-out and
watering of a particular flower in the garden, and the
exposure of it to the sun.
   In the third, identity is attained by sympathy.  It is
very difficult for the ordinary man to lose himself
completely in the subject of a play or of a novel; but for
those who can do so, this method is unquestionably the best.
   Observe: each element in this cycle is of equal value.
It is wrong to say triumphantly "Mors janua vitae", unless
you add, with equal triumph, "Vita janua mortis".  To one
who understands this chain of the Aeons from the point of
view alike of the sorrowing Isis and of the triumphant
Osiris, not forgetting their link in the destroyer Apophis,
there remains no secret veiled in Nature.  He cries that
name of God which throughout History has been echoed by one
religion to another, the infinite swelling paean
I.A.O.!<<This name, I.A.O. is qabalistically identical with
that of THE BEAST and with His number 666, so that he who
invokes the former invokes also the latter.  Also with AIWAZ
and the Number 93.  See Chapter V.>>  {15}






                            CHAPTER II

               THE FORMULAE OF THE ELEMENTAL WEAPONS.

   Before discussing magical formulae in detail, one may
observe that most rituals are composite, and contain many
formulae which must be harmonized into one.
   The first formula is that of the Wand.  In the sphere of
the principle which the magician wishes to invoke, he rises
from point to point in a perpendicular line, and then
descends; or else, beginning at the top, he comes directly
down, "invoking" first the god of that sphere by "devout
supplication"<<Beware, O brother, lest thou bend the knee!
Liber CCXX teaches the proper attitude.  See also Liber
CCCLXX. Infra, furthermore, there is special instruction:
Chapter XV and elsewhere.>> that He may deign to send the
appropriate Archangel.  He then "beseeches" the Archangel to
send the Angel or Angels of that sphere to his aid; he
"conjures" this Angel or Angels to send the intelligence in
question, and this intelligence he will "conjure with
authority" to compel the obedience of the spirit and his
manifestation.  To this spirit he "issues commands".
   It will be seen that this is a formula rather of
evocation than of invocation, and for the latter the
procedure, though apparently the same, should be conceived
of in a different manner, which brings it under another
formula, that of Tetragrammaton.  The essence of the force
invoked is one, but the "God" represents the germ or
beginning of the force, the "Archangel" its development; and
so on, until, with the "Spirit", we have the completion and
perfection of that force.  {16}
   The formula of the Cup is not so well suited for
Evocations, and the magical Hierarchy is not involved in the
same way; for the Cup being passive rather than active, it
is not fitting for the magician to use it in respect of
anything but the Highest.  In practical working it
consequently means little but prayer, and that prayer the
"prayer of silence".<<Considerations which might lead to a
contrary conclusion are unsuited to this treatise.  See
Liber LXXXI.>>
 The formula of the dagger is again unsuitable for either
purpose, since the nature of the dagger is to criticise, to
destroy, to disperse; and all true magical ceremonies tend
to concentration.  The dagger will therefore appear
principally in the banishings, preliminary to the ceremony
proper.
   The formula of the pantacle is again of no particular
use; for the pantacle is inert.  In fine, the formula of the
wand is the only one with which we need more particularly
concern ourselves.<<Later, these remarks are amplified, and
to some extent modified.>>
   Now in order to invoke any being, it is said by Hermes
Trismegistus that the magi employ three methods.  The first,
for the vulgar, is that of supplication.  In this the crude
objective theory is assumed as true.  There is a god named
A, whom you, B, proceed to petition, in exactly the same
sense as a boy might ask his father for pocket-money.
   The second method involves a little more subtlety,
inasmuch as the magician endeavours to harmonize himself
with the nature of the god, and to a certain extent exalts
himself, in the course of the ceremony; but the third method
is the only one worthy of our consideration.
   This consists of a real identification of the magician
and the god.  Note that to do this in perfection involves
the attainment of a species of Samadhi: and this fact alone
suffices to link irrefragably magick with mysticism.
   Let us describe the magical method of identification.
The symbolic form of the god is first studied with as much
care as an artist would bestow upon his model, so that a
perfectly clear and {17} unshakeable mental picture of the
god is presented to the mind.  Similarly, the attributes of
the god are enshrined in speech, and such speeches are
committed perfectly to memory.  The invocation will then
begin with a prayer to the god, commemorating his physical
attributes, always with profound understanding of their real
meaning.  In the "second part" of the invocation, the voice
of the god is heard, and His characteristic utterance is
recited.
   In the "third portion" of the invocation the magician
asserts the identity of himself with the god.  In the
"fourth portion" the god is again invoked, but as if by
Himself, as if it were the utterance of the will of the god
that He should manifest in the magician.  At the conclusion
of this, the original object of the invocation is stated.
   Thus, in the invocation of Thoth which is to be found in
the rite of Mercury (Equinox I, VI) and in Liber LXIV, the
first part begins with the words "Majesty of Godhead, wisdom-
crowned TAHUTI, Thee, Thee I invoke.  Oh Thou of the Ibis
head, Thee, Thee I invoke"; and so on.  At the conclusion of
this a mental image of the God, infinitely vast and
infinitely splendid, should be perceived, in just the same
sense as a man might see the Sun.
   The second part begins with the words:
   "Behold!  I am yesterday, today, and the brother of
tomorrow."
   The magician should imagine that he is hearing this
voice, and at the same time that he is echoing it, that it
is true also of himself.  This thought should so exalt him
that he is able at its conclusion to utter the sublime words
which open the third part: "Behold! he is in me, and I am in
him."  At this moment, he loses consciousness of his mortal
being; he is that mental image which he previously but saw.
This consciousness is only complete as he goes on: "Mine is
the radiance wherein Ptah floateth over his firmament.  I
travel upon high.  I tread upon the firmament of Nu.  I
raise a flashing flame with the lightnings of mine eye: ever
rushing on in the splendour of the daily glorified Ra ---
giving my life to the treaders of Earth!"  This thought
gives the relation of God and Man from the divine point of
view.
 The magician is only recalled to himself at the conclusion
of the {18} third part; in which occur, almost as if by
accident, the words: "Therefore do all things obey my word."
Yet in the fourth part, which begins: "Therefore do thou
come forth unto me", it is not really the magician who is
addressing the God; it is the God who hears the far-off
utterance of the magician.  If this invocation has been
correctly performed, the words of the fourth part will sound
distant and strange.  It is surprising that a dummy (so the
magus now appears to Himself) should be able to speak!
   The Egyptian Gods are so complete in their nature, so
perfectly spiritual and yet so perfectly material, that this
one invocation is sufficient.  The God bethinks him that the
spirit of Mercury should now appear to the magician; and it
is so.  This Egyptian formula is therefore to be preferred
to the Hierarchical formula of the Hebrews with its tedious
prayers, conjurations, and curses.
   It will be noted, however, that in this invocation of
Thoth which we have summarized, there is another formula
contained, the Reverberating or Reciprocating formula, which
may be called the formula of Horus and Harpocrates.  The
magician addresses the God with an active projection of his
will, and then becomes passive while the God addresses the
Universe.  In the fourth part he remains silent, listening,
to the prayer which arises therefrom.
   The formula of this invocation of Thoth may also be
classed under Tetragrammaton.  The first part is fire, the
eager prayer of the magician, the second water, in which the
magician listens to, or catches the reflection of, the god.
The third part is air, the marriage of fire and water; the
god and the man have become one; while the fourth part
corresponds to earth, the condensation or materialization of
those three higher principles.
   With regard to the Hebrew formulae, it is doubtful
whether most magicians who use them have ever properly
grasped the principles underlying the method of identity.
No passage which implies it occurs to mind, and the extant
rituals certainly give no hint of such a conception, or of
any but the most personal and material views of the nature
of things.  They seem to have thought that there was an
Archangel named Ratziel in exactly the same sense as there
was a statesman named Richelieu, an individual being living
in a definite place.  He had possibly certain powers of a
somewhat metaphysical order --- he might be {19} in two
places at once,<<He could do this provided that he can
travel with a speed exceeding that of Light, as he does.
See A.S.Eddington "Space, Time, and Gravitation".  Also:
what means "at once"?>> for example, though even the
possibility of so simple a feat (in the case of spirits)
seems to be denied by certain passages in extant
conjurations which tell the spirit that if he happens to be
in chains in a particular place in Hell, or if some other
magician is conjuring him so that he cannot come, then let
him send a spirit of similar nature, or otherwise avoid the
difficultly.  But of course so vulgar a conception would not
occur to the student of the Qabalah.  It is  just possible
that the magi wrote their conjurations on this crude
hypothesis in order to avoid the clouding of the mind by
doubt and metaphysical speculation.
   He who became the Master Therion was once confronted by
this very difficulty.  Being determined to instruct mankind,
He sought a simple statement of his object.  His will was
sufficiently informed by common sense to decide him to teach
man "The Next Step", the thing which was immediately above
him.  He might have called this "God", or "The Higher Self",
or "The Augoeides", or "Adi-Buddha", or 61 other things ---
but He had discovered that these were all one, yet that each
one represented some theory of the Universe which would
ultimately be shattered by criticism --- for He had already
passed through the realm of Reason, and knew that every
statement contained an absurdity.  He therefore said: "Let
me declare this Work under this title: 'The obtaining of the
Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel'",
because the theory implied in these words is so patently
absurd that only simpletons would waste much time in
analysing it.  It would be accepted as a convention, and no
one would incur the grave danger of building a philosophical
system upon it.
 With this understanding, we may rehabilitate the Hebrew
system of invocations.  The mind is the great enemy; so, by
invoking enthusiastically a person whom we know not to
exist, we are rebuking that mind.  Yet we should not refrain
altogether from philosophising in the light of the Holy
Qabalah.  We should accept the Magical Hierarchy as a more
or less convenient classification of the facts of the
Universe as they are {20} known to us; and as our knowledge
and understanding of those facts increase, so should we
endeavour to adjust our idea of what we mean by any symbol.
   At the same time let us reflect that there is a certain
definite consensus of experience as to the correlation of
the various beings of the hierarchy with the observed facts
of Magick.  In the simple matter of astral vision, for
example, one striking case may be quoted.
   Without telling him what it was, the Master Therion once
recited as an invocation Sappho's "Ode to Venus" before a
Probationer of the A.'. A.'. who was ignorant of Greek, the
language of the Ode.  The disciple then went on an "astral
journey," and everything seen by him was without exception
harmonious with Venus.  This was true down to the smallest
detail.  He even obtained all the four colour-scales of
Venus with absolute correctness.  Considering that he saw
something like one hundred symbols in all, the odds against
coincidence are incalculably great.  Such an experience (and
the records of the A.'. A.'. contain dozens of similar
cases) affords proof as absolute as any proof can be in this
world of Illusion that the correspondences in Liber 777
really represent facts in Nature.
   It suggests itself that this "straightforward" system of
magick was perhaps never really employed at all.  One might
maintain that the invocations which have come down to us are
but the ruins of the Temple of Magick.  The exorcisms might
have been committed to writing for the purpose of memorising
them, while it was forbidden to make any record of the
really important parts of the ceremony.  Such details of
Ritual as we possess are meagre and unconvincing, and though
much success has been attained in the quite conventional
exoteric way both by FRATER PERDURABO and by many of his
colleagues, yet ceremonies of this character have always
remained tedious and difficult.  It has seemed as if the
success were obtained almost in spite of the ceremony.  In
any case, they are the more mysterious parts of the Ritual
which have evoked the divine force.  Such conjurations as
those of the "Goetia" leave one cold, although, notably in
the second conjuration, there is a crude attempt to use that
formula of Commemoration of which we spoke in the preceding
Chapter.  {21}







                             CHAPTER III

                  THE FORMULA OF TETRAGRAMMATON.<<Yod, He,
Vau, He, the Ineffable Name (Jehovah) of the Hebrews.  The
four letters refer respectively to the four "elements",
Fire, Water, Air, Earth, in the order named.>>

   This formula is of most universal aspect, as all things
are necessarily comprehended in it; but its use in a magical
ceremony is little understood.
   The climax of the formula is in one sense before even the
formulation of the Yod.  For the Yod is the most divine
aspect of the Force --- the remaining letters are but a
solidification of the same thing.  It must be understood
that we are here speaking of the whole ceremony considered
as a unity, not merely of that formula in which "Yod" is the
god invoked, "He" the Archangel, and so on.  In order to
understand the ceremony under this formula, we must take a
more extended view of the functions of the four weapons than
we have hitherto done.
   The formation of the "Yod" is the formulation of the
first creative force, of that father who is called "self-
begotten", and unto whom it is said: "Thou has formulated
thy Father, and made fertile thy Mother".  The adding of the
"He" to the "Yod" is the marriage of that Father to the
great co-equal Mother, who is a reflection of Nuit as He is
of Hadit.  Their union brings forth the son "Vau" who is the
heir.  Finally the daughter "He" is produced.  She is both
the twin sister and the daughter of "Vau".<<There is a
further mystery herein, far deeper, for initiates.>>
   His mission is to redeem her by making her his bride; the
result of this is to set her upon the throne of her mother,
and it is only she whose youthful embrace can reawaken the
eld of the {22} All-Father.  In this complex family
relationship<<The formula of Tetragrammaton, as ordinarily
understood, ending with the appearance of the daughter, is
indeed a degradation.>> is symbolised the whole course of
the Universe.  It will be seen that (after all) the Climax
is at the end.  It is the second half of the formula which
symbolises the Great Work which we are pledged to
accomplish.  The first step of this is the attainment of the
Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel, which
constitutes the Adept of the Inner Order.
   The re-entry of these twin spouses into the womb of the
mother is that initiation described in Liber 418, which
gives admission to the Inmost Order of the A.'. A.'.  Of the
last step we cannot speak.
   It will now be recognised that to devise a practical
magical ceremony to correspond to Tetragrammaton in this
exalted sense might be difficult if not impossible.  In such
a ceremony the Rituals of purification alone might occupy
many incarnations.
   It will be necessary, therefore, to revert to the simpler
view of Tetragrammaton, remembering only that the "He" final
is the Throne of the Spirit, of the Shin of Pentagrammaton.
   The Yod will represent a swift and violent creative
energy; following this will be a calmer and more reflective
but even more powerful flow of will, the irresistible force
of a mighty river.  This state of mind will be followed by
an expansion of the consciousness; it will penetrate all
space, and this will finally undergo a crystallization
resplendent with interior light.  Such modifications of the
original Will may be observed in the course of the
invocations when they are properly performed.
   The peculiar dangers of each are obvious --- that of the
first is a flash in the pan --- a misfire; that of the
second, a falling into dreaminess or reverie; that of the
third, loss of concentration.  A mistake in any of these
points will prevent, or injure the proper formation of, the
fourth.
   In the expression which will be used in Chapter XV:
"Enflame thyself", etc., only the first stage is specified;
but if that is properly done the other stages will follow as
if by necessity.  So far is  it written concerning the
formula of Tetragrammaton.  {23}






                             CHAPTER IV.

                THE FORMULA OF ALHIM, AND THAT OF ALIM.

  "ALHIM", (Elohim) is the exoteric word for Gods.<<"Gods"
are the Forces of Nature; their "Names" are the Laws of
Nature.  Thus They are eternal, omnipotent, omnipresent and
so on; and thus their "Wills" are immutable and absolute.>>
It is the masculine plural of a feminine noun, but its
nature is principally feminine.<<It represents Sakti,or Teh;
femininity always means form, manifestation.  The masculine
Siva, or Tao, is always a concealed force.>> It is a perfect
hieroglyph of the number 5.  This should be studied in "A
Note on Genesis" (Equinox I, II).
   The Elements are all represented, as in Tetragrammaton,
but there is no development from one into the others.  They
are, as it were, thrown together --- untamed, only
sympathising by virtue of their wild and stormy  but
elastically resistless energy.  The Central letter is "He" -
-- the letter of breath --- and represents Spirit.  The
first letter "Aleph" is the natural letter of Air, and the
Final "Mem" is the natural letter of Water.  Together,
"Aleph" and "Mem" make "Am" --- the mother within whose womb
the Cosmos is conceived.  But "Yod" is not the natural
letter of Fire.  Its juxtaposition with "He" sanctifies that
fire to the "Yod" of Tetragrammaton.  Similarly we find
"Lamed" for Earth, where we should expect Tau --- in order
to emphasize the influence of Venus, who rules Libra.
   "ALHIM", therefore, represents rather the formula of
Consecration than that of a complete ceremony.  It is the
breath of benediction, yet so potent that it can give life
to clay and light to darkness.
   In consecrating a weapon, "Aleph" is the whirling force
of the thunderbolt, the lightning which flameth out of the
East even {24} into the West.  This is the gift of the
wielding of the thunderbolt of Zeus or Indra, the god of
Air.  "Lamed" is the Ox-goad, the driving force; and it is
also the Balance, representing the truth and love of the
Magician.  It is the loving care which he bestows upon
perfecting his instruments, and the equilibration of that
fierce force which initiates the ceremony.<<The letters
Aleph and Lamed are infinitely important in this Aeon of
Horus; they are indeed the Key of the Book of the Law.  No
more can be said in this place than that Aleph is
Harpocrates, Bacchus Diphues, the Holy Ghost, the "Pure
Fool" or Innocent Babe who is also the Wandering Singer who
impregnates the King's Daughter with Himself as Her Child;
Lamed is the King's Daughter, satisfied by Him, holding His
"Sword and Balances" in her lap.  These weapons are the
Judge, armed with power to execute His Will, and Two
Witnesses "in whom shall every Truth be established" in
accordance with whose testimony he gives judgment.>>
   "Yod" is the creative energy -- the procreative power:
and yet "Yod" is the solitude and silence of the hermitage
into which the Magician has shut himself.  "Mem" is the
letter of water, and it is the Mem final, whose long flat
lines suggest the Sea at Peace HB:Mem-final ; not the
ordinary (initial and medial) Mem whose hieroglyph is a wave
HB:Mem.<<In the symbolism above outlined, Yod is the
Mercurial "Virgin Word", the Spermatozoon concealing its
light under a cloke; and Mem is the amniotic fluid, the
flood wherein is the Life-bearing Ark.  See A. Crowley "The
Ship", Equinox I, X.>>  And then, in the Centre of all,
broods Spirit, which combines the mildness of the Lamb with
the horns of the Ram, and is the letter of Bacchus or
"Christ".<<The letter He is the formula of Nuith, which
makes possible the process described in the previous notes.
But it is not permissible here to explain fully the exact
matter or manner of this adjustment.  I have preferred the
exoteric attributions, which are sufficiently informative
for the beginner.>>
 After the magician has created his instrument, and balanced
it truly, and filled it with the lightnings of his Will,
then is the weapon laid away to   rest; and in this Silence,
a true Consecration comes.

                       THE FORMULA OF ALIM

   It is extremely interesting to contrast with the above
the formula of the elemental Gods deprived of the creative
spirit.  One {25} might suppose that as ALIM, is the
masculine plural of the masculine noun AL, its formula would
be more virile than that of ALHIM, which is the masculine
plural of the feminine noun ALH.  A moment's investigation
is sufficient to dissipate the illusion.  The word masculine
has no meaning except in relation to some feminine
correlative.
   The word ALIM may in fact be considered as neuter.  By a
rather absurd convention, neuter objects are treated as
feminine on account of their superficial resemblance in
passivity and inertness with the unfertilized female.  But
the female produces life by the intervention of the male,
while the neuter does so only when impregnated by Spirit.
Thus we find the feminine AMA, becoming AIMA<<AMA is 42, the
number of sterility; AIMA, 52, that of fertility, of BN, the
SON.>>, through the operation of the phallic Yod, while
ALIM, the congress of dead elements, only fructifies by the
brooding of Spirit.
 This being so, how can we describe ALIM as containing a
Magical Formula? Inquiry discloses the fact that this
formula is of a very special kind.
 The word adds up to 81, which is a number of the moon.  It
is thus the formula of witchcraft, which is under
Hecate.<<See A. Crowley "Orpheus" for the Invocation of this
Goddess.>>  It is only the romantic mediaeval perversion of
science that represents young women as partaking in
witchcraft, which is, properly speaking, restricted to the
use of such women as are no longer women in the Magical
sense of the word, because thy are no longer capable of
corresponding to the formula of the male, and are therefore
neuter rather than feminine.  It is for this reason that
their method has always been referred to the moon, in that
sense of the term in which she appears, not as the feminine
correlative of the sun, but as the burnt-out, dead, airless
satellite of earth.
   No true Magical operation can be performed by the formula
of ALIM.  All the works of witchcraft are illusory; and
their apparent effects depend on the idea that it is
possible to alter things by the mere rearrangement of them.
One {26} must not rely upon the false analogy of the Xylenes
to rebut this argument.  It is quite true that geometrical
isomers act in different manners towards the substance to
which they are brought into relation.  And it is of course
necessary sometimes to rearrange the elements of a molecule
before that molecule can form either the masculine or the
feminine element in a true Magical combination with some
other molecule.
   It is therefore occasionally inevitable for a Magician to
reorganize the structure of certain elements before
proceeding to his operation proper.  Although such work is
technically witchcraft, it must not be regarded as
undesirable on that ground, for all operations which do not
transmute matter fall strictly speaking under this heading.
   The real objection to this formula is not inherent in its
own nature.  Witchcraft consists in treating it as the
exclusive preoccupation of Magick, and especially in denying
to the Holy Spirit his right to indwell His Temple.<<The
initiate of the XI Degree of O.T.O. will remark that there
is a totally different formula of ALIM, complementary with
that here discussed.  81 may be regarded as a number of
Yesod rather than of Luna.  The actual meaning of the word
may be taken as indicating the formula.  Aleph may be
referred to Harpocrates, with allusion to the well-known
poem of Catullus.  Lamed may imply the exaltation of Saturn,
and suggest the Three of Swords in a particular manner.  Yod
will then recall Hermes, and Mem the Hanged Man.  We have
thus a Tetragrammaton which contains no feminine component.
The initial Force is here the Holy Spirit and its vehicle or
weapon the "Sword and Balances".  Justice is then done upon
the Mercurial "Virgin", with the result that the Man is
"Hanged" or extended, and is slain in this manner.  Such an
operation makes creation impossible --- as in the former
case; but here there is no question of re-arrangement; the
creative force is employed deliberately for destruction, and
is entirely absorbed in its own sphere (or cylinder, on
Einstein's equations) of action.  This Work is to be
regarded as "Holiness to the Lord".  The Hebrews, in fact,
conferred the title of Qadosh (holy) upon its adepts.  Its
effect is to consecrate the Magicians who perform it in a
very special way.  We may take note also of the
correspondence of Nine with Teth, XI, Leo, and the Serpent.
The great merits of this formula are that it avoids contact
with the inferior planes, that it is self-sufficient, that
it involves no responsibilities, and that it leaves its
masters not only stronger in themselves, but wholly free to
fulfil their essential Natures.  Its abuse is an
abomination.>> {27}






                              CHAPTER V

                        The Formula of I.A.O.

   This formula is the  principal and most characteristic
formula of Osiris, of the Redemption of Mankind.  "I" is
Isis, Nature, ruined by "A", Apophis the Destroyer, and
restored to life by the Redeemer Osiris.<<There is a quite
different formula in which I is the father, O the Mother, A
the child --- and yet another, in which I.A.O. are all
fathers of different kinds balanced by H.H.H., 3 Mothers, to
complete the Universe.  In a third, the true formula of the
Beast 666, I and O are the opposites which form the field
for the operation of A.  But this is a higher matter
unsuited for this elementary handbook.  See, however, Liber
Samekh, Point II, Section J.>>  The same idea is expressed
by the Rosicrucian formula of the Trinity:
       "Ex Deo nascimur.
       In Jesu Morimur
       Per Spiritum Sanctum reviviscimus."
 This is also identical with the Word Lux, L.V.X., which is
formed by the arms of a cross.  It is this formula which is
implied in those ancient and modern monuments in which the
phallus is worshipped as the Saviour of the World.
   The doctrine of resurrection as vulgarly understood is
false and absurd.  It is not even "Scriptural".  St. Paul
does not identify the glorified body which rises with the
mortal body which dies.  On the contrary, he repeatedly
insists on the distinction.
   The same is true of a magical ceremony.  The magician who
is destroyed by absorption in the Godhead is really
destroyed.  The {28} miserable mortal automaton remains in
the Circle.  It is of no more consequence to Him that the
dust of the floor.<<It is, for all that, His instrument,
acquired by Him as an astronomer buys a telescope.  See
Liber Aleph, for a full explanation of the objects attained
by the stratagem of incarnation; also Part IV of this Book
4.>>
   But before entering into the details of "I.A.O." as a
magick formula it should be remarked that it is essentially
the formula of Yoga or meditation; in fact, of elementary
mysticism in all its branches.
 In beginning a meditation practice, there is always<<If
not, one is not working properly.>> a quiet pleasure, a
gentle natural growth; one takes a lively interest in the
work; it seems easy; one is quite pleased to have started.
This stage represents Isis.  Sooner or later it is succeeded
by depression --- the Dark Night of the Soul, an infinite
weariness and detestation of the work.  The simplest and
easiest acts become almost impossible to perform.  Such
impotence fills the mind with apprehension and despair.  The
intensity of this loathing can hardly be understood by any
person who has not experienced it.  This is the period of
Apophis.
   It is followed by the arising not of Isis, but of Osiris.
The ancient condition is not restored, but a new and
superior condition is created, a condition only rendered
possible by the process of death.
   The Alchemists themselves taught this same truth.  The
first matter of the work was base and primitive, though
"natural".  After passing through various stages the "black
dragon" appeared; but from this arose the pure and perfect
gold.
 Even in the legend of Prometheus we find an identical
formula concealed; and a similar remark applies to those of
Jesus Christ, and of many other mythical god-men worshipped
in different countries.<<See J.G.Frazer, "The Golden Bough:"
J.M.Robertson "Pagan Christs;" A. Crowley "Jesus," etc.,
etc.>>
   A magical ceremony constructed on this formula is thus in
close essential harmony with the natural mystic process.  We
find it the {29} basis of many important initiations,
notably the Third Degree in Masonry, and the 5 Degree =
6Square ceremony of the G.'. D.'. described in Equinox I,
III.  A ceremonial self-initiation may be constructed with
advantage on this formula.  The essence of it consists in
robing yourself as a king, then stripping and slaying
yourself, and rising from that death to the Knowledge and
Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel<<This formula,
although now superseded by that of HORUS, the Crowned and
Conquering Child, remains valid for those who have not yet
assimilated the point of view of the Law of Thelema.  But
see Appendix, Liber SAMEKH.  Compare also "The Book of the
Spirit of the Living Gods," -- where there is a ritual given
"in extenso" on slightly different lines: Equinox I, III,
pages 269-272.>>.  There is an etymological identity between
Tetragrammaton and "I A O", but the magical formulae are
entirely different, as the descriptions here given have
schewn.
   Professor William James, in his "Varieties of Religious
Experience," has well classified religion as the "once-born"
and the "twice-born"; but the religion now proclaimed in
Liber Legis harmonizes these by transcending them.  There is
no attempt to get rid of death by denying it, as among the
once-born; nor to accept death as the gate of a new life, as
among the twice-born.  With the A.'. A.'. life and death are
equally incidents in a career, very much like day and night
in the history of a planet.  But, to pursue the simile, we
regard this planet from afar.  A Brother of A.'. A.'. looks
at (what another person would call) "himself", as one ---
or, rather, some --- among a group of phenomena.  He is that
"nothing" whose consciousness is in one sense the universe
considered as a single phenomenon in time and space, and in
another sense is the negation of that consciousness.  The
body and mind of the man are only important (if at all) as
the telescope of the astronomer to him.  If the telescope
were destroyed it would make no appreciable difference to
the Universe which that telescope reveals.
   It will now be understood that this formula of I A O is a
formula of Tiphareth.  The magician who employs it is
conscious of himself as a man liable to suffering, and
anxious to transcend that state by becoming one with god.
It will appear to him as the Supreme Ritual, as the final
step; but, as has already been {30} pointed out, it is but a
preliminary.  For the normal man today, however, it
represents considerable attainment; and there is a much
earlier formula whose investigation will occupy Chapter VI.
   THE MASTER THERION, in the Seventeenth year of the Aeon,
has reconstructed the Word I A O to satisfy the new
conditions of Magick imposed by progress.  The Word of the
Law being Thelema, whose number is 93, this number should be
the canon of a corresponding Mass.  Accordingly, he has
expanded I A O by treating the O as an Ayin, and then adding
Vau as prefix and affix.  The full word is then

 Vau Yod Aleph Ayin Vau

whose number is 93.  We may analyse this new Word in detail
and demonstrate that it is a proper hieroglyph of the Ritual
of Self-Initiation in this Aeon of Horus.  For the
correspondence in the following note, see Liber 777.  The
principal points are these: {31}



--------------.---.-------------.---.--------------.--------
----------------
              :   :             :   :              :
     Atu      :No.:   Hebrew    :No.:Correspondence:
Other
              :of :             :of :              :
(Tarot Trump) :Atu:  letters    :let:  in Nature   :
Correspondences
              :   :             :ter:              :
--------------+---+-------------+---+--------------+--------
----------------
              :   :             :   :              :
              :   :             :   :              :
The Hiero-    : V :Vau (a nail) : 6 :Taurus   (An  :The Sun.
The son in Te-
  phant. (Osi-:   : English V,  :   :  earthy sign :
tragrammaton. (See Cap.
  ris throned :   : W, or vo-   :   :  ruled by    :  III).
The  Pentagram
  & crowned,  :   : wel between :   :  Venus; the  :  which
shows Spirit
  with Wand.  :   :  O and U-   :   :  Moon exalt- :  master
& reconciler of
              :   : ma'ajab and :   :  ed therein. :  the
Four Elements.
              :   : ma'aruf.    :   :  but male.)  :
Four  Wor-    :   :             :   :  Liberty,i.e.:The
Hexagram which un-
  shippers;the:   :             :   :  free will.  :  God
and Man. The cons-
  four ele-   :   :             :   :              :
sciousness or Ruach.
  ments.      :   :             :   :              :
              :   :             :   :              :Parzival
as the Child in
              :   :             :   :              :  his
widowed mother's
              :   :             :   :              :  care:
Horus, son of
              :   :             :   :              :  Isis
and the slain
              :   :             :   :              :
Osiris.
              :   :             :   :              :
              :   :             :   :              :Parzival
as King &
              :   :             :   :              : Priest
in Montsalvat
              :   :             :   :              :
performing the mir-
              :   :             :   :              : acle of
redemption;
              :   :             :   :              : Horus
crowned and
              :   :             :   :              :
conquering, taking the
              :   :             :   :              : place
of his father.
              :   :             :   :              :
              :   :             :   :              :Christ-
Bacchus in Hea-
              :   :             :   :              :  ven-
Olympus saving the
              :   :             :   :              :  world.
              :   :             :   :              :
              :   :             :   :              :
              :   :             :   :              :
The Hermit    :IX :Yod (a hand) : 10:Virgo (an     :The root
of the Alphabet
  (Hermes     :   :  English I  :   :  earthy sign : The
Spermatozoon.  The
  with Lamp,  :   :  or Y.      :   :  ruled by    : youth
setting out on
  Wings,      :   :             :   :  Mercury     : his
adventures after
  Wand,       :   :             :   :  exalted     :
receiving the Wand.
  Cloak, and  :   :             :   :  therein;    :
Parzival in the desert
  Serpent).   :   :             :   :  sexually    : Christ
taking refuge
              :   :             :   :  ambivalent) : in
Egypt, and on
              :   :             :   :  Light, i.e. : the
Mount tempted by
              :   :             :   :  of Wisdom,  : the
Devil.  The uncon-
              :   :             :   :  the Inmost. : scious
Will, or Word.

 {32}



--------------.---.-------------.---.--------------.--------
----------------
              :   :             :   :              :
     Atu      :No.:   Hebrew    :No.:Correspondence:
Other
              :of :             : of:              :
(Tarot Trump) :Atu:  letters    :let:  in Nature   :
Correspondences
              :   :             :ter:              :
--------------+---+-------------+---+--------------+--------
----------------
              :   :             :   :              :
              :   :             :   :              :
The Fool      : O :Aleph (an ox): 1 :Air (The con- :The free
breath.  The
  (The Babe   :   : English A,  :   :  dition of   :
Svastika. The Holy
  in the Egg  :   : more or     :   :  all Life,   :  Ghost.
The Virgin's
  on the Lo-  :   : less        :   :  the impar-  :  Womb.
Parzial as "der
  tus, Bacchus:   :             :   :  tial vehicle:  reine
Thor" who knows
  Diphues,    :   :             :   :  Sexually    :
nothing.  Horus.
  etc.        :   :             :   : undevelop-   :  Christ-
Bacchus as the
              :   :             :   : ed). Life;   :
innocent babe, pursued
              :   :             :   : i.e. the     :  by
Herod-Here.
              :   :             :   : organ of     :
Hercules strangling
              :   :             :   : possible     :  the
serpents. The
              :   :             :   : expression.  :
Unconscious Self not
              :   :             :   :              :  yet
determined in any
              :   :             :   :              :
direction.
              :   :             :   :              :
              :   :             :   :              :
The Devil     :XV :Ayin (an     : 70:Capricornus   :Parzival
in Black Armour,
  (Baphomet   :   :  eye)  En-  :   :  (an earthy  :  ready
to return to
  throned &   :   :  glish A, or:   :  sign ruled  :
Montsalvat as Redeemer-
  adored by   :   :  O more or  :   :  by Saturn;  :  King:
Horus come to
  Male & Fe-  :   :  less:  the :   :  Mars exalt- :  full
growth. Christ-
  male.  See  :   :  bleat of a :   :  ed therein. :
Bacchus with Calvary-
  Eliphas     :   :  goat, A'a. :   :  Sexually    :  Cross
Kithairon ---
  Levi's de-  :   :             :   :  male)       :
Thyrsus.
  sign.)      :   :             :   :  love: i.e.  :
              :   :             :   :  the instinct:
              :   :             :   :  to satisfy  :
              :   :             :   :  Godhead by  :
              :   :             :   :  uniting it  :
              :   :             :   :  with the    :
              :   :             :   : Universe.    :
              :   :             :   :              :

 Iota-Alpha-Digamma varies in significance with successive
Aeons.

                              {33}



   "Aeon of Isis." Matriarchal Age.  The Great Work
conceived as a straightforward simple affair.
   We find the theory reflected in the customs of
Matriarchy.  Parthenogenesis is supposed to be true.  The
Virgin (Yod-Virgo) contains in herself the Principle of
Growth --- the epicene Hermetic seed.  It becomes the Babe
in the Egg (A --- Harpocrates) by virtue of the Spirit (A =
Air, impregnating the Mother---Vulture) and this becomes the
Sun or Son ( Digamma = the letter of Tiphareth, 6, even when
spelt as Omega, in Coptic.  See 777).
   "Aeon of Osiris."  Patriarchal age.  Two sexes.  I
conceived as the Father-Wand.  (Yod in Tetragrammaton).  A
the Babe is pursued by the Dragon, who casts a flood from
his mouth to swallow it.  See "Rev." VII.  The Dragon is
also the Mother --- the "Evil Mother" of Freud.  It is
Harpocrates, threatened by the crocodile in the Nile.  We
find the symbolism of the Ark, the Coffin of Osiris, etc.
The Lotus is the Yoni; the Water the Amniotic Fluid.  In
order to live his own life, the child must leave the Mother,
and overcome the temptation to return to her for refuge.
Kundry, Armida, Jocasta, Circe, etc., are symbols of this
force which tempts the Hero.  He may take her as his
servant<<Her sole speech in the last Act is "Dienen:
Dienen".>> when he has mastered her, so as to heal his
father (Amfortas), avenge him (Osiris), or pacify him
(Jehovah).  But in order to grow to manhood, he must cease
to depend on her, earning the Lance (Parzival), claiming his
arms (Achilles), or making his club (Hercules)<<Note that
all these three remain for a time as neuters among woman,
prevented from living the male life.>>, and wander in the
waterless wilderness like Krishna, Jesus, Oedipus,  chi.
tau.  lambda. --- until the hour when, as the "King's Son"
or knight-errant, he must win the Princess, and set himself
upon a strange throne.  Almost all the legends of heroes
imply this formula in strikingly similar symbols.   Digamma.
Vau the Sun --- Son.  He is supposed to be mortal; but how
is this shewn?  It seems an absolute perversion of truth:
the sacred symbols have no hint of it.  This lie is the
essence of the Great Sorcery.  Osirian religion is a
Freudian phantasy fashioned of man's dread of death and
ignorance of nature.  The parthenogenesis-idea {34}
persists, but is now the formula for incarnating demi-gods,
or divine kings; these must be slain and raised from the
dead in one way or another.<<All these ideas may be
explained by reference to anthropology.  But this is not
their condemnation, but their justification; for the customs
and legends of mankind reflect the true nature of the
species.>>
"Aeon of Horus."  Two sexes in one person.
 Digamma Iota Alpha Omicron Digamma:  93, the full formula,
recognizing the Sun as the Son (Star), as the pre-existent
manifested Unit from which all springs and to which all
returns.  The Great Work is to make the initial  Digamma
Digamma of Assiah (The world of material illusion) into the
final  Digamma Iota Digamma of Atziluth,<<For these
spellings see 777.>> the world of pure reality.
Spelling the Name in full,  Digamma Digamma +  Iota Digamma
Delta +  Alpha Lambda Pi +  Omicron Iota Nu + Digamma Iota =
309 = Sh T = XX + XI = 31 the secret Key of the Law.
Digamma is the manifested Star.
Iota is the secret Life .............. Serpent
          ---      Light ............. Lamp
          ---      Love .............. Wand
          ---      Liberty ........... Wings
          ---      Silence ........... Cloak
     These symbols are all shewn in the Atu "The Hermit".
     They are the powers of the Yod, whose extension is the
Vau.
     Yod is the Hand wherewith man does his Will.  It is
also
     The Virgin; his essence is inviolate.
Alpha is the Babe "who has formulated his Father, and made
fertile
      his Mother" --- Harpocrates, etc., as before; but he
develops
      to
Omicron  The exalted "Devil" (also the "other" secret Eye)
by the
         formula of the Initiation of Horus elsewhere
described in
         detail.  This "Devil" is called Satan or Shaitan,
and regarded with horror by people who are ignorant of his
formula, and, imagining themselves to be evil, accuse Nature
herself of their own phantasmal crime.  Satan is Saturn,
Set, Abrasax, Adad, Adonis, Attis, Adam, Adonai, etc.  The
most serious charge against him is that he is the Sun in the
South.  The Ancient Initiates, {35} dwelling as they did in
lands whose blood was the water of the Nile or the
Euphrates, connected the South with life-withering heat, and
cursed that quarter where the solar darts were deadliest.
Even in the legend of Hiram, it is at high noon that he is
stricken down and slain.  Capricornus is moreover the sign
which the sun enterers when he reaches his extreme Southern
declination at the Winter Solstice, the season of the death
of vegetation, for the folk of the Northern hemisphere.
This gave them a second cause for cursing the south.  A
third; the tyranny of hot, dry, poisonous winds; the menace
of deserts or oceans dreadful because mysterious and
impassable; these also were connected in their minds with
the South.  But to us, aware of astronomical facts, this
antagonism to the South is a silly superstition which the
accidents of their local conditions suggested to our
animistic ancestors.  We see no enmity between Right and
Left, Up and Down, and similar pairs of opposites.  These
antitheses are real only as a statement of relation; they
are the conventions of an arbitrary device for representing
our ideas in a pluralistic symbolism based on duality.
"Good" must be defined in terms of human ideals and
instincts.  "East" has no meaning except with reference to
the earth's internal affairs; as an absolute direction in
space it changes a degree every four minutes.  "Up" is the
same for no two men, unless one chance to be in the line
joining the other with the centre of the earth.  "Hard" is
the private opinion of our muscles.  "True" is an utterly
unintelligible epithet which has proved refractory to the
analysis of our ablest philosophers.
   We have therefore no scruple in restoring the "devil-
worship" of such ideas as those which the laws of sound, and
the phenomena of speech and hearing, compel us to connect
with the group of "Gods" whose names are based upon Sht, or
D, vocalized by the free breath A.  For these Names imply
the qualities of courage, frankness, energy, pride, power
and triumph; they are the words which express the creative
and paternal will.
 Thus "the Devil" is Capricornus, the Goat who leaps upon
the loftiest mountains, the Godhead which, if it become
manifest in man, makes him Aegipan, the All.
   The Sun enters this sign when he turns to renew the year
in the North.  He is also the vowel O, proper to roar, to
boom, and {36} to command, being a forcible breath
controlled by the firm circle of the mouth.
   He is the Open Eye of the exalted Sun, before whom all
shadows flee away: also that Secret Eye which makes an image
of its God, the Light, and gives it power to utter oracles,
enlightening the mind.
 Thus, he is Man made God, exalted, eager; he has come
consciously to his full stature, and so is ready to set out
on his journey to redeem the world.  But he may not appear
in this true form; the Vision of Pan would drive men mad
with fear.  He must conceal Himself in his original guise.
 He therefore becomes apparently the man that he was at the
beginning; he lives the life of a man; indeed, he is wholly
man.  But his initiation has made him master of the Event by
giving him the understanding that whatever happens to him is
the execution of this true will.  Thus the last stage of his
initiation is expressed in our formula as the final:
Digamma --- The series of transformations has not affected
his identity; but it has explained him to himself.
Similarly, Copper is still Copper after
Cu+O = CuO:+H SO =CuS O(H O):+K S=CuS(K SO ):
             2  4    4   2     2       2  4     + blowpipe
and reducing agent = Cu(S).
   It is the same copper, but we have learnt some of its
properties.  We observe especially that it is
indestructible, inviolably itself throughout all its
adventures, and in all its disguises.  We see moreover that
it can only make use of its powers, fulfill the
possibilities of its nature, and satisfy its equations, by
thus combining with its counterparts.  Its existence as a
separate substance is evidence of its subjection to stress;
and this is felt as the ache of an incomprehensible yearning
until it realises that every experience is a relief, an
expression of itself; and that it cannot be injured by aught
that may befall it.  In the Aeon of Osiris it was indeed
realised that Man must die in order to live.  But now in the
Aeon of Horus we know that every event is a death; subject
and object slay each other in "love under will"; each such
death is itself life, the means by which one realises
oneself in a series of episodes.
   The second main point is the completion of the A babe
Bacchus by the O Pan (Parzival wins the Lance, etc.).  {37}
   The first process is to find the I in the V ---
initiation, purification, finding the Secret Root of
oneself, the epicene Virgin who is 10 (Malkuth) but spelt in
full 20 (Jupiter).
   This Yod in the "Virgin" expands to the Babe in the Egg
by formulating the Secret Wisdom of Truth of Hermes in the
Silence of the Fool.  He acquires the Eye-Wand, beholding
the acting and being adored.  The Inverted Pentagram ---
Baphomet --- the Hermaphrodite fully grown --- begets
himself on himself as V again.
   Note that there are now two sexes in one person
throughout, so that each individual is self-procreative
sexually, whereas Isis knew only one sex, and Osiris thought
the two sexes opposed.  Also the formula is now Love in all
cases; and the end is the beginning, on a higher plane.
   The I is formed from the V by removing its tail, the A by
balancing 4 Yods, the O by making an inverted triangle of
Yods, which suggests the formula of Nuit --- Hadit --- Ra-
Hoor-Khuit.  A is the elements whirling as a Svastika ---
the creative Energy in equilibrated action.<<WEH Note:
Thus, note the vesica:

Vau             Yod


Aleph     Yod         Yod             -----.    :
                                           :    :
                                      .----+----.
          Yod         Yod             :    :
                                      :    .-----
Ayin     Yod         Yod


                Yod

>>

                             --------------
{38}




                           CHAPTER VI

                THE FORMULA OF THE NEOPHYTE<<See the
Neophyte Ceremony, Equinox I,II.>>.

   This formula has for its "first matter" the ordinary man
entirely ignorant of everything and incapable of anything.
He is therefore represented as blindfolded and bound.  His
only aid is his aspiration, represented by the officer who
is to lead him into the Temple.  Before entering, he must be
purified and consecrated.  Once within the Temple, he is
required to bind himself by an oath.  His aspiration is now
formulated as Will.  He makes the mystic circumambulation of
the Temple for the reasons to be described in the Chapter on
"Gesture".  After further purification and consecration, he
is allowed for one moment to see the Lord of the West, and
gains courage<<Fear is the source of all false perception.
Even Freud had a glimpse of this fact.>> to persist.  For
the third time he is purified and consecrated, and he sees
the Lord of the East, who holds the balance, keeping him in
a straight line.  In the West he gains energy.  In the East
he is prevented from dissipating the same.  So fortified, he
may be received into the Order as a neophyte by the three
principal officers, thus uniting the Cross with the
Triangle.  He may then be placed between the pillars of the
Temple, to receive the fourth and final consecration.  In
this position the secrets of the grade are communicated to
him, and the last of his fetters is removed.  All this is
sealed by the sacrament of the Four Elements.
   It will be seen that the effect of this whole ceremony is
to endow a thing inert and impotent with balanced motion in
a given direction.  Numerous example of this formula are
given {39} in Equinox I, Nos. II and III.  It is the formula
of the Neophyte Ceremony of G.'. D.'.  It should be employed
in the consecration of the actual weapons used by the
magician, and may also be used as the first formula of
initiation.
   In the book called Z 2<<Those sections dealing with
divination and alchemy are the most grotesque rubbish in the
latter case, and in the former obscure and unpractical.>>
(Equinox I, III) are given full details of this formula,
which cannot be too carefully studied and practised.  It is
unfortunately, the most complex of all of them.  But this is
the fault of the first matter of the work, which is so
muddled that many operations are required to unify it.


                            ------------


{40}








                             CHAPTER VII

                   THE FORMULA OF THE HOLY GRAAL:

                                 OF

                             ABRAHADABRA:

                    "and of certain other Words."

                      Also: THE MAGICAL MEMORY.

   The Hieroglyph shewn in the Seventh Key of the Tarot
(described in the 12th Aethyr, Liber 418, Equinox I, V) is
the Charioteer of OUR LADY BABALON, whose Cup or Graal he
hears.
   Now this is an important formula.  It is the First of the
Formulae, in a sense, for it is the formula of
Renunciation.<<There is no moral implication here.  But to
choose A implies to refuse not-A: at least, that is so,
below the Abyss.>>  It is also the Last!
   This Cup is said to be full of the Blood of the Saints;
that is, every "saint" or magician must give the last drop
of his life's blood to that cup.  It is the original price
paid for magick power.  And if by magick power we mean the
true power, the assimilation of all force with the Ultimate
Light, the true Bridal of the Rosy Cross, then is that blood
the offering of Virginity, the sole sacrifice well-pleasing
to the Master, the sacrifice whose only reward is the pain
of child-bearing unto him.
 But "to sell one's soul to the devil", to renounce no
matter what for an equivalent in personal gain<<"Supposed"
personal gain.  There is really no person to gain; so the
whole transaction is a swindle on both sides.>>, is black
magic.  You are no longer a noble giver of your all, but a
mean huckster.  {41}
   This formula is, however, a little different in
symbolism, since it is a Woman whose Cup must be filled.  It
is rather the sacrifice of the Man, who transfers life to
his descendants.  For a woman does not carry in herself the
principle of new life, except temporarily, when it is given
her.
   But here the formula implies much more even than this.
For it is his whole life that the Magus offers to OUR LADY.
The Cross is both Death and Generation, and it is on the
Cross that the Rose blooms.  The full significance of these
symbols is so lofty that it is hardly fitted for an
elementary treatise of this type.  One must be an Exempt
Adept, and have become ready to pass on, before one can see
the symbols even from the lower plane.  Only a Master of the
Temple can fully understand them.
   (However, the reader may study Liber CLVI, in Equinox I,
VI, the 12th and 2nd Aethyrs in Liber 418 in Equinox I, V,
and the Symbolism of the V Degree and VI Degree in O.T.O.)
   Of the preservation of this blood which OUR LADY offers
to the ANCIENT ONE, CHAOS<<CHAOS is a general name for the
totality of the Units of Existence; it is thus a name
feminine in form.  Each unit of CHAOS is itself All-
Father.>> the All-Father, to revive him, and of how his
divine Essence fills the Daughter (the soul of Man) and
places her upon the Throne of the Mother, fulfilling the
Economy of the Universe, and thus ultimately rewarding the
Magician (the Son) ten thousandfold, it would be still more
improper to speak in this place.  So holy a mystery is the
Arcanum of the Masters of the Temple, that it is here hinted
at in order to blind the presumptuous who may, unworthy,
seek to lift the veil, and at the same time to lighten the
darkness of such as may be requiring only one ray of the Sun
in order to spring into life and light.

                                II

   ABRAHADABRA is a word to be studied in Equinox I, V.,
"The Temple of Solomon the King".  It represents the Great
Work complete, and it is therefore an archetype of all
lesser magical operations.  It is in a way too perfect to be
applied in {42} advance to any of them.  But an example of
such an operation may be studied in Equinox I, VII, "The
Temple of Solomon the King", where an invocation of Horus on
this formula is given in full.  Note the reverberation of
the ideas one against another.  The formula of Horus has not
yet been so fully worked out in details as to justify a
treatise upon its exoteric theory and practice; but one may
say that it is, to the formula of Osiris, what the turbine
is to the reciprocating engine.

                              III

   There are many other sacred words which enshrine formulae
of great efficacity in particular operations.
   For example, V.I.T.R.I.O.L. gives a certain Regimen of
the Planets useful in Alchemical work.  Ararita is a formula
of the macrocosm potent in certain very lofty Operations of
the Magick of the Inmost Light.  (See Liber 813.)
   The formula of Thelema may be summarized thus: Theta
"Babalon and the Beast conjoined" --- epsilon unto Nuith
(CCXX, I, 51) --- lambda The Work accomplished in Justice --
- eta The Holy Graal --- mu The Water therein --- alpha The
Babe in the Egg (Harpocrates on the Lotus.)
   That of "Agape" is as follows:
   Dionysus (Capital Alpha) --- The Virgin Earth gamma ---
The Babe in the Egg (small alpha --- the image of the
Father) --- The Massacre of the Innocents, pi (winepress) --
- The Draught of Ecstasy, eta.
   The student will find it well worth his while to seek out
these ideas in detail, and develop the technique of their
application.
   There is also the Gnostic Name of the Seven Vowels, which
gives a musical formula most puissant in evocations of the
Soul of Nature.  There is moreover ABRAXAS; there is
XNOUBIS; there is MEITHRAS; and indeed it may briefly be
stated that every true name of God gives the formula of the
invocation of that God.<<Members of the IV Degree of the
O.T.O. are well aware of a Magick Word whose analysis
contains all truth, human and Divine, a word indeed potent
for any group which dares to use it.>>  It would therefore
be impossible, even were it desirable, to analyse all such
names.  The general method of doing so has been {43} given,
and the magician must himself work out his own formula for
particular cases.<<The Holy Qabalah (see Liber D in Equinox
I, VIII, Supplement, and Liber 777) affords the means of
analysis and application required.  See also Equinox I, V,
"The Temple of Solomon The King".>>

                             IV.

   It should also be remarked that every grade has its
peculiar magical formula.  Thus, the formula of Abrahadabra
concerns us, as men, principally because each of us
represents the pentagram or microcosm; and our equilibration
must therefore be with the hexagram or macrocosm.  In other
words, 5 Degree = 6Square is the formula of the Solar
operation; but then 6 Degree = 5Square is the formula of the
Martial operation, and this reversal of the figures implies
a very different Work.  In the former instance the problem
was to dissolve the microcosm in the macrocosm; but this
other problem is to separate a particular force from the
macrocosm, just as a savage might hew out a flint axe from
the deposits in a chalk cliff.  Similarly, an operation of
Jupiter will be of the nature of the equilibration of him
with Venus.  Its graphic formula will be 7 Degree = 4Square,
and there will be a word in which the character of this
operation is described, just as Abrahadabra describes the
Operation of the Great Work.
   It may be stated without unfairness, as a rough general
principle, that the farther from original equality are the
two sides of the equation, the more difficult is the
operation to perform.
   Thus, to take the case of the personal operation
symbolized by the grades, it is harder to become a Neophyte,
1 Degree = 10Square, than to pass from that grade to
Zelator, 2 Degree = 9Square.
   Initiation is, therefore, progressively easier, in a
certain sense, after the first step is taken.  But
(especially after the passing of Tiphareth) the distance
between grade and grade increases as it were by a
geometrical progression with an enormously high factor,
which itself progresses.<<A suggestion has recently been
made that the Hierarchy of the Grades should be "destroyed,
and replaced by" --- a ring system of 13 grades all equal.
There is, of course, one sense in which every grade is a
Thing-in-Itself.  But the Hierarchy is only a convenient
method of classifying observed facts.  One is reminded of
the Democracy, who, on being informed by the Minister of the
Interior that the scarcity of provisions was due to the Law
of Supply and Demand, passed a unanimous resolution calling
for the immediate repeal of that iniquitous measure!
    Every person, whatever his grade in the Order, has also
a "natural" grade appropriate to his intrinsic virtue.  He
may expect to be "cast out" into that grade when he becomes
8 Degree = 3Square.  Thus one man, throughout  his career,
may be essentially of the type of Netzach; another, of Hod.
In the same way Rembrandt and Raphael retained their
respective points of view in all stages of their art.  The
practical consideration is that some aspirants may find it
unusually difficult to attain certain grades; or, worse,
allow their inherent predispositions to influence them to
neglect antipathetic, and indulge sympathetic, types of
work.  They may thus become more unbalanced than ever, with
disastrous results.  Success in one's favourite pursuit is a
temptress; whose yields to her wiles limits his own growth.
True, every Will is partial; but, even so, it can only
fulfill itself by symmetrical expansion.  It must be
adjusted to the Universe, or fail of perfection.>> {44}
   It is evidently impossible to give details of all these
formulae.  Before beginning any operation soever the
magician must make a through Qabalistic study of it so as to
work out its theory in symmetry of perfection.  Preparedness
in Magick is as important as it is in War.

                              V

 It should be profitable to make a somewhat detailed study
of the strange-looking word AUMGN, for its analysis affords
an excellent illustration of the principles on which the
Practicus may construct his own Sacred Words.
 This word has been uttered by the MASTER THERION himself,
as a means of declaring his own personal work as the Beast,
the Logos of the Aeon.  To understand it, we must make a
preliminary consideration of the word which it replaces and
from which it was developed: the word AUM.
   The word AUM is the sacred Hindu mantra which was the
supreme hieroglyph of Truth, a compendium of the Sacred
Knowledge.  Many volumes have been written with regard to
it; but, for our present purpose, it will be necessary only
to explain how it came to serve for the representation of
the principal philosophical tenets of the Rishis.  {45}
   Firstly, it represents the complete course of sound.  It
is pronounced by forcing the breath from the back of the
throat with the mouth wide open, through the buccal cavity
with the lips so shaped as to modify the sound from A to O
(or U), to the closed lips, when it becomes M.
Symbolically, this announces the course of Nature as
proceeding from free and formless creation through
controlled and formed preservation to the silence of
destruction.  The three sounds are harmonized into one; and
thus the word represents the Hindu Trinity of Brahma,
Vishnu, and Shiva; and the operations in the Universe of
their triune energy.  It is thus the formula of a
Manvantara, or period of manifested existence, which
alternates with a Pralaya, during which creation is latent.
   Analysed Qabalistically, the word is found to possess
similar properties.  A is the negative, and also the unity
which concentrates it into a positive form.  A is the Holy
Spirit who begets God in flesh upon the Virgin, according to
the formula familiar to students of "The Golden Bough".  A
is also the "babe in the Egg" thus produced.  The quality of
A is thus bisexual.  It is the original being --- Zeus
Arrhenothelus, Bacchus Diphues, or Baphomet.
   U or V is the manifested son himself.  Its number is 6.
It refers therefore, to the dual nature of the Logos as
divine and human; the interlacing of the upright and averse
triangles in the hexagram.  It is the first number of the
Sun, whose last number<<The Sun being 6, a square 6x6
contains 36 squares.  We arrange the numbers from 1 to 36 in
this square, so that each line, file, and diagonal adds to
the same number.  This number is 111; the total of all is
666.>> is 666, "the number of a man".
   The letter M exhibits the termination of this process.
It is the Hanged Man of the Tarot; the formation of the
individual from the absolute is closed by his death.
   We see accordingly how AUM is, on either system, the
expression of a dogma which implies catastrophe in nature.
It is cognate with the formula of the Slain God.  The
"resurrection" and "ascension" are not implied in it.  They
are later inventions without basis in necessity; they may be
described indeed as Freudian phantasms conjured up by the
fear of facing reality.  To {46} the Hindu, indeed, they are
still less respectable.  in his view, existence is
essentially objectionable<<Thelemites agree that manifested
existence implies Imperfection.  But they understand why
Perfection devises this disguise.  The Theory is developed
fully in Liber Aleph, and in Part IV of this Book 4.  See
also Cap V Paragraph on Digamma final of Digamma-Iota-Alpha-
Omicron-Digamma.>>; and his principle concern is to invoke
Shiva<<The Vaishnava theory, superficially opposed to this,
turns out on analysis to be practically identical.>> to
destroy the illusion whose thrall is the curse of the
Manvantara.
   The cardinal revelation of the Great Aeon of Horus is
that this formula AUM does not represent the facts of
nature.  The point of view is based upon misapprehension of
the character of existence.  It soon became obvious to The
Master Therion that AUM was an inadequate and misleading
hieroglyph.  It stated only part of the truth, and it
implied a fundamental falsehood.  He consequently determined
to modify the word in such a manner as to fit it to
represent the Arcana unveiled by the Aeon of which He had
attained to be the Logos.
 The essential task was to emphasize the fact that nature is
not catastrophic, but proceeds by means of undulations.  It
might be suggested that Manvantara and Pralaya are in
reality complementary curves; but the Hindu doctrine insists
strongly on denying continuity to the successive phases.  It
was nevertheless important to avoid disturbing the
Trinitarian arrangement of the word, as would be done by the
addition of other letters.  It was equally desirable to make
it clear that the letter M represents an operation which
does not actually occur in nature except as the withdrawal
of phenomena into the absolute; which process, even when so
understood, is not a true destruction, but, on the contrary,
the emancipation of anything from the modifications which it
had mistaken for itself.  It occurred to him that the true
nature of Silence was to permit the uninterrupted vibration
of the undulatory energy, free from the false conceptions
attached to it by the Ahamkara or Ego-making facility, whose
assumption that conscious individuality constitutes
existence let it to consider its own apparently catastrophic
character as pertaining to the order of nature. {47}
   The undulatory formula of putrefaction is represented in
the Qabalah by the letter N, which refers to Scorpio, whose
triune nature combines the Eagle, Snake and Scorpion.  These
hieroglyphs themselves indicate the spiritual formulae of
incarnation.  He was also anxious to use the letter G,
another triune formula expressive of the aspects of the
moon, which further declares the nature of human existence
in the following manner.  The moon is in itself a dark orb;
but an appearance of light is communicated to it by the sun;
and it is exactly in this way that successive incarnations
create the appearance, just as the individual star, which
every man is, remains itself, irrespective of whether earth
perceives it or not.
   Now it so happens that the root GN signifies both
knowledge and generation combined in a single idea, in an
absolute form independent of personality.  The G is a silent
letter, as in our word Gnosis; and the sound GN is nasal,
suggesting therefore the breath of life as opposed to that
of speech.  Impelled by these considerations, the Master
Therion proposed to replace the M of AUM by a compound
letter MGN, symbolizing thereby the subtle transformation of
the apparent silence and death which terminates the
manifested life of Vau by a continuous vibration of an
impersonal energy of the nature of generation and knowledge,
the Virgin Moon and the Serpent furthermore operating to
include in the idea a commemoration of the legend so grossly
deformed in the Hebrew legend of the Garden of Eden, and its
even more malignantly debased falsification in that bitterly
sectarian broadside, the Apocalypse.
   Sound work invariable vindicates itself by furnishing
confirmatory corollaries not contemplated by the Qabalist.
In the present instance, the Master Therion was delighted to
remark that his compound letter MGN, constructed on
theoretical principles with the idea of incorporating the
new knowledge of the Aeon, had the value of 93 (M = 40, G =
3, N = 50).  93 is the number of the word of the Law ---
Thelema --- Will, and of Agape --- Love, which indicates the
nature of Will.  It is furthermore the number of the Word
which overcomes death, as members of the degree of M M of
the O.T.O. are well aware;<<WEH NOTE: III Degree O.T.O., a
word never to be written, published or spoken without the
rite.>> and it is also that of the complete formula of
existence as expressed in the {48} True Word of the
Neophyte,<<WEH NOTE: Another unpublished word, this time
belonging to the A.'. A.'. and not to O.T.O. The two words
are different, even to the number of letters.  It was
written down once, in a letter to Frank Bennett.>> where
existence is taken to import that phase of the whole which
is the finite resolution of the Qabalistic Zero.
   Finally, the total numeration of the Word AUMGN is 100,
which, as initiates of the Sanctuary of the Gnosis of the
O.T.O.<<WEH NOTE: IX Degree O.T.O.>> are taught, expresses
the unity under the form of complete manifestation by the
symbolism of pure number, being Kether by Aiq Bkr<<A method
of exegesis in which 1 = 10 = 100, 2 = 20 = 200, etc.>>;
also Malkuth multiplied by itself<<10 to the 2 power  =
100.>>, and thus established in the phenomenal universe.
But, moreover, this number 100 mysteriously indicates the
Magical formula of the Universe as a reverberatory engine
for the extension of Nothingness through the device of
equilibrated opposites.<<Koph-Pehfinal = 100 (20 + 80).
HB:Koph = chi = Kappa-tau-epsilon-iota-sigma: HB:Pehfinal  =
phi = Phi-alpha-lambda-lambda-omicron-sigma; (by
Notariqon).>>
   It is moreover the value of the letter Qoph, which means
"the back of the head", the cerebellum, where the creative
or reproductive force is primarily situated.  Qoph in the
Tarot is "the Moon", a card suggesting illusion, yet shewing
counterpartal forces operating in darkness, and the Winged
Beetle or Midnight Sun in his Bark travelling through the
Nadir.  Its Yetziratic attribution is Pisces, symbolic of
the positive and negative currents of fluidic energy, the
male Ichthus or "Pesce" and the female Vesica, seeking
respectively the anode and kathode.  The number 100 is
therefore a synthetic glyph of the subtle energies employed
in creating the Illusion, or Reflection of Reality, which we
call manifested existence.
   The above are the principal considerations in the matter
of AUMGN.  They should suffice to illustrate to the student
the methods employed in the construction of the
hieroglyphics of Magick, and to arm him with a mantra of
terrific power by virtue whereof he may apprehend the
Universe, and    control in himself its Karmic consequences.
{49}


                                 VI

                        THE MAGICAL MEMORY.<<WEH NOTE: This
is not the same "Magical Memory" as that described by F. A.
Yates and used by the ancient Roman orators for mnemonics.>>

                                 I

 There is no more important task than the exploration of
one's previous incarnations<<It has been objected to
reincarnation that the population of this planet has been
increasing rapidly.  Were do the new souls come from? It is
not necessary to invent theories about other planets; it is
enough to say that the earth is passing through a period
when human units are being built up from the elements with
increased frequency.  The evidence for this theory springs
to the eye: in what other age was there such puerility, such
lack of race-experience, such reliance upon incoherent
formulas?  (Contrast the infantile emotionalism and
credulity of the average "well-educated" Anglo-Saxon with
the shrewd common sense of the normal illiterate peasant.) A
large proportion of mankind today is composed of "souls" who
are living the human life for the first time.  Note
especially the incredible spread of congenital homosexuality
and other sexual deficiencies in many forms.  These are the
people who have not understood, accepted, and used even the
Formula of Osiris.  Kin to them are the "once-born" of
William James, who are incapable of philosophy, magick, or
even religion, but seek instinctively a refuge from the
horror of contemplating Nature, which they do not
comprehend, in soothing-syrup affirmations such as those of
Christian Science, Spiritualism, and all the sham 'occult'
creeds, as well as the emasculated forms of so-called
Christianity.>>.  As Zoroaster says: "Explore the river of
the soul; whence and in what order thou has come." One
cannot do one's True Will intelligently unless one knows
what it is.  Liber Thisarb, Equinox I, VII, give
instructions for determining this by calculating the
resultant of the forces which have made one what one is.
But this practice is confined to one's present incarnation.
   If one were to wake up in a boat on a strange river, it
would be rash to conclude that the direction of the one
reach visible was that of the whole stream.  It would help
very much if one remembered the bearings of previous reaches
traversed before one's nap.  It would further relieve one's
anxiety when one became aware that a uniform and constant
force was the single determinant of all the findings of the
stream: gravitation.  We could rejoice "that even the
weariest river winds somewhere safe to sea."
 Liber Thisarb describes a method of obtaining the Magical
Memory by learning to remember backwards.  But the careful
{50} practice of Dharana is perhaps more generally useful.
As one prevents the more accessible thoughts from arising,
we strike deeper strata --- memories of childhood reawaken.
Still deeper lies a class of thoughts whose origin puzzles
us.  Some of these apparently belong to former incarnations.
By cultivating these departments of one's mind we can
develop them; we become expert; we form an organized
coherence of these originally disconnected elements; the
faculty grows with astonishing rapidity, once the knack of
the business is mastered.
   It is much easier (for obvious reasons) to acquire the
Magical Memory when one has been sworn for many lives to
reincarnate immediately.  The great obstacle is the
phenomenon called Freudian forgetfulness; that is to say,
that, though an unpleasant event may be recorded faithfully
enough by the mechanism of the brain, we fail to recall it,
or recall it wrong, because it is painful.  "The
Psychopathology of Everyday Life" analyses and illustrates
this phenomenon in detail.  Now, the King of Terrors being
Death, it is hard indeed to look it in the face.  Mankind
has created a host of phantastic masks; people talk of
"going to heaven", "passing over", and so on; banners
flaunted from pasteboard towers of baseless theories.  One
instinctively flinches from remembering one's last, as one
does from imagining one's next, death.<<This later is a very
valuable practice to perform.  See Liber HHH; also read up
the Buddhist meditations of the Ten Impurities. {WEH NOTE
ADENDA: Right, but it scares the dickens out of you! When I
succeeded in the practice in my teens, I panicked out of
using the related abilities for several years.  This was
without benefit of initiation.}>>  The point of view of the
initiate helps one immensely.
 As soon as one has passed this Pons Asinorum, the practice
becomes much easier.  It is much less trouble to reach the
life before the last; familiarity with death breeds contempt
for it.
   It is a very great assistance to the beginner if he
happens to have some intellectual grounds for identifying
himself with some definite person in the immediate past.  A
brief account of Aleister Crowley's good fortune in this
matter should be instructive.  It will be seen that the
points of contact vary greatly in character.

   1. The date of Eliphas Levi's death was about six months
previous to that of Aleister Crowley's birth.  The
reincarnating ego is supposed to take possession of the
foetus at about this stage of development. {51}
   2. Eliphas Levi had a striking personal resemblance to
Aleister Crowley's father.  This of course merely suggests a
certain degree of suitability from a physical point of view.
   3. Aleister Crowley wrote a play called "The Fatal Force"
at a time when he had not read any of Eliphas Levi's works.
The motive of this play is a Magical Operation of a very
peculiar kind.  The formula which Aleister Crowley supposed
to be his original idea is mentioned by Levi.  We have not
been able to trace it anywhere else with such exact
correspondence in every detail.
   4. Aleister Crowley found a certain quarter of Paris
incomprehensibly familiar and attractive to him.  This was
not the ordinary phenomenon of the "deja vu", it was chiefly
a sense of being at home again.  He discovered long after
that Levi had lived in the neighbourhood for many years.
   5. There are many curious similarities between the events
of Eliphas Levi's life and that of Aleister Crowley.  The
intention of the parents that their son should have a
religious career; the inability to make use of very
remarkable talents in any regular way; the inexplicable
ostracism which afflicted him, and whose authors seemed
somehow to be ashamed of themselves; the events relative to
marriage<<Levi, on her deliberately abandoning him, withdrew
his protection from his wife; she lost her beauty and
intelligence, and became the prey of an aged and hideous
pithecoid.  Aleister Crowley's wife insisted upon doing her
own will, as she defined it; this compelled him to stand
aside.  What happened to Mme. Constant happened to her,
although in a more violent and disastrous form.>>: all these
offer surprisingly close parallels.
   6. The characters of the two men present subtle
identities in many points.  Both seem to be constantly
trying to reconcile insuperable antagonisms.  Both find it
hard to destroy the delusion that men's fixed beliefs and
customs may be radically altered by a few friendly
explanations.  Both show a curious fondness for out-the-way
learning, preferring recondite sources of knowledge they
adopt eccentric appearances.  Both inspire what can only be
called panic fear in absolute strangers, who can give no
reason whatever for a repulsion which sometimes almost
amounts to {52} temporary insanity.  The ruling passion in
each case is that of helping humanity.  Both show quixotic
disregard of their personal prosperity, and even comfort,
yet both display love of luxury and splendour.  Both have
the pride of Satan.
   7. When Aleister Crowley became Frater Omicron-Upsilon
Mu-Eta and had to write his thesis for the grade of Adeptus
Exemptus, he had already collected his ideas when Levi's
"Clef des Grands Mysteres" fell into his hands.  It was
remarkable that he, having admired Levi for many years, and
even begun to suspect the identity, had not troubled
(although an extravagant buyer of books) to get this
particular work.  He found, to his astonishment, that almost
everything that he had himself intended to say was there
written.  The result of this was that he abandoned writing
his original work, and instead translated the masterpiece in
question.
   8. The style of the two men is strikingly similar in
numerous subtle and deep-seated ways.  The general point of
view is almost identical.  The quality of the irony is the
same.  Both take a perverse pleasure in playing practical
jokes on the reader.  In one point, above all, the identity
is absolute --- there is no third name in literature which
can be put in the same class.  The point is this: In a
single sentence is combined sublimity and enthusiasm with
sneering bitterness, scepticism, grossness and scorn.  It is
evidently the supreme enjoyment to strike a chord composed
of as many conflicting elements as possible.  The pleasure
seems to be derived from gratifying the sense of power, the
power to compel every possible element of thought to
contribute to the spasm.
   If the theory of reincarnation were generally accepted,
the above considerations would make out a strong case.
FRATER PERDURABO was quite convinced in one part of his mind
of this identity, long before he got any actual memories as
such.<<Long since writing the above, the publication of the
biography of Eliphas Levi by M. Paul Chacornat has confirmed
the hypothesis in innumerable striking ways.>>

                               II

   Unless one has a groundwork of this sort to start with,
one must get back to one's life as best one can by the
methods above indicated.  {53} It may be of some assistance
to give a few characteristics of genuine Magical Memory; to
mention a few sources of error, and to lay down critical
rules for the verification of one's results.
   The first great danger arises from vanity.  One should
always beware of "remembering" that one was Cleopatra or
Shakespeare.
   Again, superficial resemblances are usually misleading.
   One of the great tests of the genuineness of any
recollection is that one remembers the really important
things in one's life, not those which mankind commonly
classes as such.  For instance, Aleister Crowley does not
remember any of the decisive events in the life of Eliphas
Levi.  He recalls intimate trivialities of childhood.  He
has a vivid recollection of certain spiritual crises; in
particular, one which was fought out as he paced up and down
a lonely stretch of road in a flat and desolate district.
He remembers ridiculous incidents, such as often happen at
suppers when the conversation takes a turn such that its
gaiety somehow strikes to the soul, and one receives a
supreme revelation which is yet perfectly inarticulate.  He
has forgotten his marriage and its tragic results<<It is
perhaps significant that although the name of the woman has
been familiar to him since 1898, he has never been able to
commit it to memory.>>, although the plagiarism which Fate
has been shameless enough to perpetrate in this present
life, would naturally, one might think, reopen the wound.
   There is a sense which assures us intuitively when we are
running on a scent breast high.  There is an "oddness" about
the memory which is somehow annoying.  It gives a feeling of
shame and guiltiness.  There is a tendency to blush.  One
feels like a schoolboy caught red-handed in the act of
writing poetry.  There is the same sort of feeling as one
has when one finds a faded photograph or a lock of hair
twenty years old among the rubbish in some forgotten
cabinet.  This feeling is independent of the question
whether the thing remembered was in itself a source of
pleasure or of pain.  Can it be that we resent the idea of
our "previous condition of servitude"?  We want to forget
the past, however good reason we may have to be proud of it.
It is well known that many men are embarrassed in the
presence of a monkey.  {54}
   When the "loss of face" does not occur, distrust the
accuracy of the item which you recall,  The only reliable
recollections which present themselves with serenity are
invariably connected with what men call disasters.  Instead
of the feeling of being caught in the slips, one has that of
being missed at the wicket.  One has the sly satisfaction of
having done an outrageously foolish thing and got off scot
free.  When one sees life in perspective, it is an immense
relief to discover that things like bankruptcy, wedlock, and
the gallows made no particular difference.  They were only
accidents such as might happen to anybody; they had no real
bearing on the point at issue.  One consequently remembers
having one's ears cropped as a lucky escape, while the
causal jest of a drunken skeinsmate in an all-night cafe
stings one with the shame of the parvenu to whom a polite
stranger has unsuspectingly mentioned "Mine Uncle".
   The testimony of intuitions is, however, strictly
subjective, and shrieks for collateral security.  It would
be a great error to ask too much.  In consequence of the
peculiar character of the recollections which are under the
microscope, anything in the shape of gross confirmation
almost presumes perjury.  A pathologist would arouse
suspicion if he said that his bacilli had arranged
themselves on the slide so as to spell Staphylococcus.  We
distrust an arrangement of flowers which tells us that "Life
is worth living in Detroit, Michigan".  Suppose that
Aleister Crowley remembers that he was Sir Edward Kelly.  It
does not follow that he will be able to give us details of
Cracow in the time of James I of England.  Material events
are the words of an arbitrary language; the symbols of a
cipher previously agreed on.  What happened to Kelly in
Cracow may have meant something to him, but there is no
reason to presume that it has any meaning for his successor.
   There is an obvious line of criticism about any
recollection.  It must not clash with ascertained facts.
For example --- one cannot have two lives which overlap,
unless there is reason to suppose that the earlier died
spiritually before his body ceased to breathe.  This might
happen in certain cases, such as insanity.
   It is not conclusive against a previous incarnation that
the present should be inferior to the past.  One's life may
represent the full possibilities of a certain partial Karma.
One may have {55} devoted one's incarnation to discharging
the liabilities of one part of one's previous character.
For instance, one might devote a lifetime to settling the
bill run up by Napoleon for causing unnecessary suffering,
with the object of starting afresh, clear of debt, in a life
devoted to reaping the reward of the Corsican's invaluable
services to the race.

   The Master Therion, in fact, remembers several
incarnations of almost uncompensated wretchedness, anguish
and humiliation,  voluntarily undertaken so that he might
resume his work unhampered by spiritual creditors.

   These are the stigmata.  Memory is hall-marked by its
correspondence with the facts actually observed in the
present.  This correspondence may be of two kinds.  It is
rare (and it is unimportant for the reasons stated above)
that one's memory should be confirmed by what may be called,
contemptuously, external evidence.  It was indeed a reliable
contribution to psychology to remark that an evil and
adulterous generation sought for a sign.
   (Even so, the permanent value of the observation is to
trace the genealogy of the Pharisee --- from Caiaphas to the
modern Christian.)
   Signs mislead, from "Painless Dentistry" upwards.  The
fact that anything is intelligible proves that it is
addressed to the wrong quarter, because the very existence
of language presupposes impotence to communicate directly.
When Walter Raleigh flung his cloak upon the muddy road, he
merely expressed, in a cipher contrived by a combination of
circumstances, his otherwise inexpressible wish to get on
good terms with Queen Elizabeth.  The significance of his
action was determined by the concourse of circumstances.
The reality can have no reason for reproducing itself
exclusively in that especial form.  It can have no reason
for remembering that so extravagant a ritual happened to be
necessary to worship.  Therefore, however well a man might
remember his incarnation as Julius Caesar, there is no
necessity for his representing his power to set all upon the
hazard of a die by imagining the Rubicon.  Any spiritual
state can be symbolized by an infinite variety of actions in
an infinite variety of circumstances.  One should recollect
only those events which happen to {56} be immediately linked
with one's peculiar tendencies to imagine one thing rather
than another.<<The exception is when some whimsical
circumstance ties a knot in the corner of one's mnemonic
handkerchief.>>
   Genuine recollections almost invariably explain oneself
to oneself.  Suppose, for example, that you feel an
instinctive aversion to some particular kind of wine.  Try
as you will, you can find no reason for your idiosyncrasy.
Suppose, then, that when you explore some previous
incarnation, you remember that you died by a poison
administered in a wine of that character, your aversion is
explained by the proverb, "A burnt child dreads the fire."
It may be objected that in such a case your libido has
created a phantasm of itself in the manner which Freud has
explained.  The criticism is just, but its value is reduced
if it should happen that you were not aware of its existence
until your Magical Memory attracted your attention to it.
In fact, the essence of the test consists in this: that your
memory notifies you of something which is the logical
conclusion of the premisses postulated by the past.
   As an example, we may cite certain memories of the Master
Therion.  He followed a train of thought which led him to
remember his life as a Roman named Marius de Aquila.  It
would be straining probability to presume a connection
between (alpha) this hieroglyphically recorded mode of self-
analysis and (beta) ordinary introspection conducted on
principles intelligible to himself.  He remembers directly
various people and various events connected with this
incarnation; and they are in themselves to all appearance
actual.  There is no particular reason why they, rather than
any others, should have entered his sphere.  In the act of
remembering them, they are absolute.  He can find no reason
for correlating them with anything in the present.  But a
subsequent examination of the record shows that the logical
result of the Work of Marius de Aquila did not occur to that
romantic reprobate; in point of fact, he died before
anything could happen.  Can we suppose that any cause can be
baulked of effect?  The Universe is unanimous in rebuttal.
If then the exact effects which might be expected to result
from these causes are manifested in the career {57} of the
Master Therion, it is assuredly the easiest and most
reasonable explanation to assume an identity between the two
men.  Nobody is shocked to observe that the ambition of
Napoleon has diminished the average stature of Frenchmen.
We know that somehow or other every force must find its
fulfilment; and those people who have grasped the fact that
external events are merely symptoms of external ideas,
cannot find any difficulty in attributing the
correspondences of the one to the identities of the other.
   Far be it from any apologist for Magick to insist upon
the objective validity of these concatenations!  It would be
childish to cling to the belief that Marius de Aquila
actually existed; it matters no more that it matters to the
mathematician whether the use of the symbol X to the 22
power  involves the "reality" of 22 dimension of space.  The
Master Therion does not care a scrap of yesterday's
newspaper whether he was Marius de Aquila, or whether there
ever was such a person, or whether the Universe itself is
anything more than a nightmare created by his own imprudence
in the matter of rum and water.  His memory of Marius de
Aquila, of the adventures of that person in Rome and the
Black Forest, matters nothing, either to him or to anybody
else.  What matters is this: True or false, he has found a
symbolic form which has enabled him to govern himself to the
best advantage.  "Quantum nobis prodest hec fabula Christi!"
The "falsity" of Aesop's Fables does not diminish their
value to mankind.
 The above reduction of the Magical Memory to a device for
externalizing one's interior wisdom need not be regarded as
sceptical, save only in the last resort.  No scientific
hypothesis can adduce stronger evidence of its validity than
the confirmation of its predictions by experimental
evidence.  The objective can always be expressed in
subjective symbols if necessary.  The controversy is
ultimately unmeaning.  However we interpret the evidence,
its relative truth depends in its internal coherence.  We
may therefore say that any magical recollection is genuine
if it gives the explanation of our external or internal
conditions.  Anything which throws light upon the Universe,
anything which reveals us to ourselves, should be welcome in
this world of riddles.
   As our record extends into the past, the evidence of its
truth is cumulative.  Every incarnation that we remember
must increase {58} our comprehension of ourselves as we are.
Each accession of knowledge must indicate with unmistakable
accuracy the solution of some enigma which is propounded by
the Sphynx of our own unknown birth-city, Thebes.  The
complicated situation in which we find ourselves is composed
of elements; and no element of it came out of nothing.
Newton's First Law applies to every plane of thought.  The
theory of evolution is omniform.  There is a reason for
one's predisposition to gout, or the shape of one's ear, in
the past.  The symbolism may change; the facts do not.  In
one form or another, everything that exists is derived from
some previous manifestation.  Have it, if you will, that the
memories of other incarnations are dreams; but dreams are
determined by reality just as much as the events of the day.
The truth is to be apprehended by the correct translation of
the symbolic language.  The last section of the Oath of the
Master of the Temple is: "I swear to interpret every
phenomenon as a particular dealing of God with my soul."
The Magical Memory is (in the last analysis) one manner,
and, as experience testifies, one of the most important
manners, of performing this vow.



                         -------------

{59}





                         CHAPTER VIII

           OF EQUILIBRIUM, AND OF THE GENERAL AND PARTICULAR
             METHOD OF PREPARATION OF THE FURNITURE OF THE
                 TEMPLE AND OF THE INSTRUMENTS OF ART.

                               I

   "Before there was equilibrium, countenance beheld not
countenance."<<The full significance of this aphorism is an
Arcanum of the grade of Ipsissimus.  It may, however, be
partially apprehended by study of Liber Aleph, and the Book
of the Law and the Commentaries thereon.  It explains
Existence.>>  So sayeth the holiest of the Books of the
ancient Qabalah.  (Siphra Tzeniutha 1. 2.)  One countenance
here spoken of is the Macrocosm, the other the
Microcosm.<<This is the case because we happen ourselves to
be Microcosms whose Law is "love under will".  But it is
also Magick for an unit which has attained Perfection (in
absolute nothingness, 0 Degree), to become "divided for
love's sake, for the chance of union".>>
   As said above, the object of any magick ceremony is to
unite the Macrocosm and the Microcosm.
   It is as in optics; the angles of incidence and
reflection are equal.  You must get your Macrocosm and
Microcosm exactly balanced, vertically and horizontally, or
the images will not coincide.
   This equilibrium is affirmed by the magician in arranging
the Temple.  Nothing must be lop-sided.  If you have
anything in the North, you must put something equal and
opposite to it in the South.  The importance of this is so
great, and the truth of it so obvious, that no one with the
most mediocre capacity {60} for magick can tolerate any
unbalanced object for a moment.  His instinct instantly
revolts.<<This is because the essence of his being a
Magician is his intuitive apprehension of the fundamental
principles of the Universe.  His instinct is a subconscious
assertion of the structural identity of the Macrocosm and
the Microcosm.  Equilibrium is the condition of manifested
existence.>>.  For this reason the weapons, altar, circle,
and magus are all carefully proportioned one with another.
It will not do to have a cup like a thimble and a wand like
a weaver's beam.<<See Bagh-i-Muattar, V, par. 2.>>
   Again, the arrangement of the weapons of the altar must
be such that they "look" balanced.  Nor should the magician
have any unbalanced ornament.  If he have the wand in his
right hand, let him have the Ring<<The Ring has not been
described in Part II of this book, for reasons which may be
or may not be apparent to the reader.  It is the symbol of
Nuit, the totality of the possible ways in which he may
represent himself and fulfill himself.>> on his left, or let
him take the Ankh, or the Bell, or the Cup.  And however
little he move to the right, let him balance it by an
equivalent movement to the left; or if forwards, backwards;
and let him correct each idea by implying the contradictory
contained therein.  If he invoke Severity, let him recount
that Severity is the instrument of Mercy;<<For example, as
when Firmness with one's self or another is the truest
kindness; or when amputation saves life.>> if Stability, let
him show the basis of that Stability to be constant change,
just as the stability of a molecule is secured by the
momentum of the swift atoms contained in it.<<See Liber 418,
11th Aethyr.>>
   In this way let every idea go forth as a triangle on the
base of two opposites, making an apex transcending their
contradiction in a higher harmony.
   It is not safe to use any thought in Magick, unless that
thought has been thus equilibrated and destroyed.
   Thus again with the instruments themselves; the Wand must
be ready to change into a Serpent, the Pantacle into the
whirling Svastika or Disk of Jove, as if to fulfil the
functions of the Sword.  {61} The Cross is both the death of
the "Saviour"<<It is the extension in matter of the
Individual Self, the Indivisible Point determined by
reference to the Four Quarters.  This is the formula which
enables it to express its Secret Self; its dew falling upon
the Rose is developed into an Eidolon of Itself, in due
season.>> and the Phallic symbol of Resurrection.  Will
itself must be ready to culminate in the surrender of that
Will:<<See Liber LXV and Liber VII.>> the aspiration's arrow
that is shot against the Holy Dove must transmute itself
into the wondering Virgin that receives in her womb the
quickening of that same Spirit of God.
   Any idea that is thus in itself positive and negative,
active and passive, male and female, is fit to exist above
the Abyss; any idea not so equilibrated is below the Abyss,
contains in itself an unmitigated duality or falsehood, and
is to that extent qliphotic<<See The Qabalah for the use of
this word, and study the doctrine concerning the Kings of
Edom.>> and dangerous.  Even an idea like "truth" is unsafe
unless it is realized that all Truth is in one sense
falsehood.  For all Truth is relative; and if it be supposed
absolute, will mislead.<<See Poincare for the mathematical
proof of this thesis.  But Spiritual Experience goes yet
deeper, and destroys the Canon of the Law of Contradiction.
There is an immense amount of work by the Master Therion on
this subject; it pertains especially to His grade of 9
Degree = 2Square.  Such profundities are unsuited to the
Student, and may unsettle him seriously.  It will be best
for him to consider (provisionally) Truth in the sense in
which it is taken by Physical Science.>>  "The Book of Lies
falsely so called" (Liber 333) is worthy of close and
careful study in this respect.  The reader should also
consult Konx Om Pax, "Introduction", and "Thien Tao" in the
same volume.
   All this is to be expressed in the words of the ritual
itself, and symbolised in every act performed.

                              II

   It is said in the ancient books of Magick that everything
used by the Magician must be "virgin".  That is: it must
never have been used by any other person or for any other
purpose.  The {62} greatest importance was attached by the
Adepts of old to this, and it made the task of the Magician
no easy one.  He wanted a wand; and in order to cut and trim
it he needed a knife.  It was not sufficient merely to buy a
new knife; he felt that he had to make it himself.  In order
to make the knife, he would require a hundred other things,
the acquisition of each of which might require a hundred
more; and so on.  This shows the impossibility of
disentangling one's self from one's environment.  Even in
Magick we cannot get on without the help of others.<<It is,
and the fact is still more important, utterly fatal and
demoralizing to acquire the habit of reliance on others.
The Magician must know every detail of his work, and be able
and willing to roll up his shirtsleeves and do it, no matter
how trivial or menial it may seem.  Abramelin (it is true)
forbids the Aspirant to perform any tasks of an humiliating
type; but he will never be able to command perfect service
unless he has experience of such necessary work, mastered
during his early training.>>
   There was, however, a further object in this
recommendation.  The more trouble and difficulty your weapon
costs, the more useful you will find it.  "If you want a
thing well done, do it yourself."  It would be quite useless
to take this book to a department store, and instruct them
to furnish you a Temple according to specification.  It is
really worth the while of the Student who requires a sword
to go and dig out iron ore from the earth, to smelt it
himself with charcoal that he has himself prepared, to forge
the weapon with his own hand: and even to take the trouble
of synthesizing the oil of virtiol with which it is
engraved.  He will have learnt a lot of useful things in his
attempt to make a really virgin sword; he will understand
how one thing depends upon another; he will begin to
appreciate the meaning of the words "the harmony of the
Universe", so often used so stupidly and superficially by
the ordinary apologist for Nature, and he will also perceive
the true operation of the law of Karma.<<In this sense
especially: any one thing involves, and is involved in,
others apparently altogether alien.>>
 Another notable injunction of the ancient Magick was that
whatever appertained to the Work should be "single".  The
Wand was to be cut with a single stroke of the knife.  There
must be no {63} boggling and hacking at things, no
clumsiness and no hesitation.  If you strike a blow at all,
strike with your strength!  "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to
do, do it with all thy might!"  If you are going to take up
Magick, make no compromise.  You cannot make revolutions
with rose-water, or wrestle in a silk hat.  You will find
very soon that you must either lose the hat or stop
wrestling.  Most people do both.  They take up the magical
path without sufficient reflection, without that
determination of adamant which made the author of this book
exclaim, as he took the first oath, "PERDURABO" --- "I will
endure unto the end!"<<"For enduring unto the End, at the
End was Naught to endure." Liber 333, Cap Zeta.>>  They
start on it at a great pace, and then find that their boots
are covered with mud.  Instead of persisting, they go back
to Piccadilly.  Such persons have only themselves to thank
if the very street-boys mock at them.
   Another recommendation was this: buy whatever may be
necessary without haggling!
   You must not try to strike a proportion between the
values of incommensurable things.<<However closely the
square of any fraction approximates to 2, no fraction equals
the square root of 2.  The square root of 2 is not in the
series; it is a different kind of number altogether.>>  The
least of the Magical Instruments is worth infinitely more
than all that you possess, or if you like, than all that you
stupidly suppose yourself to possess.  Break this rule, and
the usual Nemesis of the half-hearted awaits you.  Not only
do you get inferior instruments, but you lose in some other
way what you thought you were so clever to have saved.
Remember Ananias!<<Observe well that there is never any real
equivalence or measurable relation between any two things,
for each is impregnably Itself.  The exchange of property is
not a mathematically accurate equation.  The Want is merely
a conventional expression of the Will, just as a word is of
a thought.  It can never be anything else; thus, though the
process of making it, whether it involves time, money, or
labour, is a spiritual and moral synthesis, it is not
measurable in terms of its elements.>>
   On the other hand, if you purchase without haggling you
will find that along with your purchase the vendor has
thrown in {64} the purse of Fortunatus.  No matter in what
extremity you may seem to be, at the last moment your
difficulties will be solved.  For there is no power either
of the firmament of the ether, or of the earth or under the
earth, on dry land or in the water, of whirling air or of
rushing fire, or any spell or scourge of God which is not
obedient to the necessity of the Magician!  That which he
has, he has not; but that which he is, he is; and that which
he will be, he will be.  And neither God nor Man, nor all
the malice of Choronzon, can either check him, or cause him
to waver for one instant upon the Path.  This command and
this promise have been given by all the Magi without
exception.  And where this command has been obeyed, this
promise has been most certainly fulfilled.

                              III

   In all actions the same formulae are applicable.  To
invoke a god, i.e. to raise yourself to that godhead, the
process is threefold, PURIFICATION, CONSECRATION and
INITIATION.
   Therefore every magical weapon, and even the furniture of
the Temple, must be passed through this threefold regimen.
The details only vary on inessential points.  E.G. to
prepare the magician, he purifies himself by maintaining his
chastity<<See The Book of the Law and the Commentaries
thereon for the true definition of this virtue.>> and
abstaining from any defilement.  But to do the same with,
let us say, the Cup, we assure ourselves that the metal has
never been employed for any other purpose --- we smelt
virgin ore, and we take all possible pains in refining the
metal --- it must be chemically pure.
 To sum up this whole matter in a phrase, every article
employed is treated as if it were a candidate for
initiation; but in those parts of the ritual in which the
candidate is blindfolded, we wrap the weapon in a black
cloth<<This refers to the "formula of the Neophyte".  There
are alternatives.>>.  The oath which he takes is replaced by
a "charge" in similar terms.  The details of the preparation
of each weapon should be thought out carefully by the
magician.  {65}
   Further, the attitude of the magician to his weapons
should be that of the God to the suppliant who invokes Him.
It should be the love of the father for his child, the
tenderness and care of the bridegroom for his bride, and
that peculiar feeling which the creator of every work of art
feels for his masterpiece.
 Where this is clearly understood, the magician will find no
difficulty in observing the proper ritual, not only in the
actual ceremonial consecration of each weapon, but in the
actual preparation, a process which should adumbrate this
ceremony; e.g., the magician will cut the wand from the
tree, will strip it of leaves and twigs, will remove the
bark.  He will trim the ends nearly, and smooth down the
knots: --- this is the banishing.
   He will then rub it with the consecrated oil until it
becomes smooth and glistening and golden.  He will then wrap
it in silk of the appropriate colour: --- this is the
Consecration.
   He will then take it, and imagine that it is that hollow
tube in which Prometheus brought down fire from heaven,
formulating to himself the passing of the Holy Influence
through it.  In this and other ways he will perform the
initiation; and, this being accomplished, he will repeat the
whole process in an elaborate ceremony.<<I have omitted to
say that the whole subject of Magick is an example of
Mythopoeia in that particular form called Disease of
Language.  Thoth, God of Magick, was merely a man who
invented writing, as his monuments declare clearly enough.
"Grammarye", Magick, is only the Greek "Gramma".  So also
the old name of a Magical Ritual, "Grimoire", is merely a
Grammar.
   It appeared marvellous to the vulgar that men should be
able to communicate at a distance, and they began to
attribute other powers, merely invented, to the people who
were able to write.  The Wand is then nothing but the pen;
the Cup, the Inkpot; the Dagger, the knife for sharpening
the pen; and the disk (Pantacle) is either the papyrus roll
itself; or the weight which kept it in position, or the
sandbox for soaking up the ink.  And, of course, the Papyrus
of Ani is only the Latin for toilet-paper.>>
   To take an entirely different case, that of the Circle;
the magician will synthesize the Vermilion required from
Mercury an Sulphur which he has himself sublimated.  This
pure {66} vermilion he will himself mix with the consecrated
oil, and as he uses this paint he will think intently and
with devotion of the symbols which he draws.  This circle
may then be initiated by a circumambulation, during which
the magician invokes the names of God that are on it.
   Any person without sufficient ingenuity to devise proper
methods of preparation for the other articles required is
unlikely to make much of a magician; and we shall only waste
space if we deal in detail with the preparation of each
instrument.
   There is a definite instruction in Liber A vel Armorum,
in the Equinox, Volume I, Number IV, as to the Lamp and the
Four Elemental Weapons.

                          -------------

                              {67}








                            CHAPTER IX


                      OF SILENCE AND SECRECY:

                              AND OF

                 THE BARBAROUS NAMES OF EVOCATION.


   It is found by experience (confirming the statement of
Zoroaster) that the most potent conjurations are those in an
ancient and perhaps forgotten language, or even those
couched in a corrupt and possibly always meaningless jargon.
Of these there are several main types.  The "preliminary
invocation" in the "Goetia" consists principally of
corruptions of Greek and Egyptian names.  For example, we
find "Osorronnophris" for "Asor Un-Nefer".<<See appendix 4,
Liber Samekh; this is an edition of this Invocation, with an
elaborate Rubric, translation, scholia, and instruction.
    {WEH ADDENDUM:  This is the "Preliminary Invocation"
placed in the "Goetia" in the Mathers transcription (Not
"translation") by Crowley.  This invocation is not a part of
the original text, but comes to us from the Greco-Egyptian
period of perhaps the 6th century.  The Goetia is itself a
small portion of the "Lemegeton" or "Lesser Key of Solomon."
This "Preliminary Evocation" is altered in Liber Samekh over
that published in the "Goetia".>>  The conjurations given by
Dr. Dee (vide Equinox I, VIII) are in a language called
Angelic, or Enochian.  Its source has hitherto baffled
research, but it is a language and not a jargon, for it
possesses a structure of its own, and there are traces of
grammar and syntax.
   However this may be, it "works".  Even the beginner finds
that "things happen" when he uses it: and this is an
advantage --- or disadvantage! ---- shared by no other type
of language,.  The rest need skill.  This needs Prudence!
   The Egyptian Invocations are much purer, but their
meaning has not been sufficiently studied by persons
magically competent.  We possess a number of Invocations in
Greek of every degree of excellence; in Latin but few, and
those of inferior quality.  It will be noticed that in every
case the conjurations are very sonorous, {68} and there is a
certain magical voice in which they should be recited.  This
special voice was a natural gift of the Master Therion; but
it can be easily taught --- to the right people.
   Various considerations impelled Him to attempt
conjurations in the English language.  There already existed
one example, the charm of the witches in Macbeth; although
this was perhaps not meant seriously, its effect is
indubitable.<<A true poet cannot help revealing himself and
the truth of things in his art, whether he be aware of what
he is writing, or no.>>
 He has found iambic tetrameters enriched with many rimes
both internal an external very useful.  "The Wizard Way"
(Equinox I,I) gives a good idea of the sort of thing.  So
does the Evocation of Bartzabel in Equinox I,IX.  There are
many extant invocations throughout his works, in many kinds
of metre, of many kinds of being, and for many kinds of
purposes.  (See Appendix).
   Other methods of incantation are on record as
efficacious.  For instance Frater I.A., when a child, was
told that he could invoke the devil by repeating the "Lord's
Prayer" backwards.  He went into the garden and did so.  The
Devil appeared, and almost scared him out of his life.
 It is therefore not quite certain in what the efficacy of
conjurations really lies.  The peculiar mental excitement
required may even be aroused by the perception of the
absurdity of the process, and the persistence in it, as when
once FRATER PERDURABO (at the end of His magical resources)
recited "From Greenland's Icy Mountains", and obtained His
result.<<See "Eleusis", A. Crowley, "Collected Works", Vol.
III Epilogue.>>
   It may be conceded in any case that the long strings of
formidable words which roar and moan through so many
conjurations have a real effect in exalting the
consciousness of the magician to the proper pitch --- that
they should do so is no more extraordinary than music of any
kind should do so.
 Magicians have not confined themselves to the use of the
human voice.  The Pan-pipe with its seven stops,
corresponding to the seven planets, the bull-roarer, the tom-
tom, and even the violin, have all been used, as well as
many others, of which the {69} most important is the
bell<<See Part II.  It should be said that in experience no
bell save His own Tibetan bell of Electrum Magicum has ever
sounded satisfactory to the Master Therion.  Most bells jar
and repel.>>, though this is used not so much for actual
conjuration as to mark stages in the ceremony.  Of all these
the tom-tom will be found to be the most generally useful.
   While on the subject of barbarous names of evocation we
should not omit the utterance of certain supreme words which
enshrine (alpha) the complete formula of the God invoked, or
(beta) the whole ceremony.
   Examples of the former kind are Tetragrammaton, I.A.O.,
and Abrahadabra.
   An example of the latter kind is the great word
StiBeTTChePhMeFSHiSS, which is a line drawn on the Tree of
Life (Coptic attributions) in a certain manner.<<It
represents the descent of a certain Influence.  See the
Evocation of Taphtatharath, Equinox I, III.  The
attributions are given in 777.  This Word expresses the
current Kether - Beth - Binah - Cheth - Geburach - Mem - Hod
- Shin - Malkuth, the descent from 1 to 10 via the Pillar of
Severity.>>
   With all such words it is of the utmost importance that
they should never be spoken until the supreme moment, and
even then they should burst from the magician almost despite
himself --- so great should be his reluctance<<This
reluctance is Freudian, due to the power of these words to
awaken the suppressed subconscious libido.>> to utter them.
In fact, they should be the utterance of the God in him at
the first onset of the divine possession.  So uttered, they
cannot fail of effect, for they have become the effect.
   Every wise magician will have constructed (according to
the principles of the Holy Qabalah) many such words, and he
should have quintessentialised them all in one Word, which
last Word, once he has formed it, he should never utter
consciously even in thought, until perhaps with it he gives
up the ghost.  Such a Word should in fact be so potent that
man cannot hear it and live. {70}
   Such a word was indeed the lost Tetragrammaton<<The
Master Therion has received this Word; it is communicated by
Him to the proper postulants, at the proper time and place,
in the proper circumstances.>>.  It is said that at the
utterance of this name the Universe crashes into
dissolution.  Let the Magician earnestly seek this Lost
Word, for its pronunciation is synonymous with the
accomplishment of the Great Work.<<Each man has a different
Great Work, just as no two points on the circumference of a
circle are connected with the centre by the same radius.
The Word will be correspondingly unique.>>
 In this matter of the efficacity of words there are again
two formulae exactly opposite in nature.  A word may become
potent and terrible by virtue of constant repetition.  It is
in this way that most religions gain strength.  At first the
statement "So and so is God" excites no interest.  Continue,
and you meet scorn and scepticism: possibly persecution.
Continue, and the controversy has so far died out that no
one troubles to contradict your assertion.
   No superstition is so dangerous and so lively as an
exploded superstition.  The newspapers of to-day (written
and edited almost exclusively by men without a spark of
either religion or morality) dare not hint that any one
disbelieves in the ostensibly prevailing cult; they deplore
Atheism --- all but universal in practice and implicit in
the theory of practically all intelligent people --- as if
it were the eccentricity of a few negligible or
objectionable persons.  This is the ordinary story of
advertisement; the sham has exactly the same chance as the
real.  Persistence is the only quality required for success.
   The opposite formula is that of secrecy.  An idea is
perpetuated because it must never be mentioned.  A freemason
never forgets the secret words entrusted to him, thought
these words mean absolutely nothing to him, in the vast
majority of cases; the only reason for this is that he has
been forbidden to mention them, although they have been
published again and again, and are as accessible to the
profane as to the initiate.
   In such a work of practical Magick as the preaching of a
new {71} Law, these methods may be advantageously combined;
on the one hand infinite frankness and readiness to
communicate all secrets; on the other the sublime and
terrible knowledge that all real secrets are
incommunicable.<<If this were not the case, individuality
would not be inviolable.  No man can communicate even the
simplest thought to any other man in any full and accurate
sense.  For that thought is sown in a different soil, and
cannot produce an identical effect.  I cannot put a spot of
red upon two pictures without altering each in diverse ways.
It might have little effect on a sunset by Turner, but much
on a nocturne by Whistler.  The identity of the two spots as
spots would thus be fallacious.>>
   It is, according to tradition, a certain advantage in
conjurations to employ more than one language.  In all
probability the reason of this is than any change spurs the
flagging attention.  A man engaged in intense mental labour
will frequently stop and walk up and down the room --- one
may suppose for this cause --- but it is a sign of weakness
that this should be necessary.  For the beginner in Magick,
however, it is permissible<<This is not to say that it is
advisable.  O how shameful is human weakness!  But it does
encourage one --- it is useless to deny it --- to be knocked
down by a Demon of whose existence one was not really quite
sure.>> to employ any device to secure the result.
   Conjurations should be recited, not read:<<Even this is
for the weaker brethern.  The really great Magus speaks and
acts impromptu and extempore.>> and the entire ceremony
should be so perfectly performed that one is hardly
conscious of any effort of memory.  The ceremony should be
constructed with such logical fatality that a mistake is
impossible.<<First-rate poetry is easily memorized because
the ideas and the musical values correspond to man's mental
and sensory structure.>>  The conscious ego of the Magician
is to be destroyed to be absorbed in that of the God whom he
invokes, and the process should not interfere with the
automation who is performing the ceremony.
   But this ego of which it is here spoken is the true
ultimate ego.  The automaton should possess will, energy,
intelligence, reason, and resource.  This automaton should
be the perfect man far more {72} than any other man can be.
It is only the divine self within the man, a self as far
above the possession of will or any other qualities
whatsoever as the heavens are high above the earth, that
should reabsorb itself into that illimitable radiance of
which it is a spark.<<This is said of the partial or lesser
Works of Magick.  This is an elementary treatise; one cannot
discuss higher Works as for example those of "The Hermit of
Aesopus Island".>>

   The great difficulty for the single Magician is so to
perfect himself that these multifarious duties of the Ritual
are adequately performed.  At first he will find that the
exaltation destroys memory and paralyses muscle.  This is an
essential difficulty of the magical process, and can only be
overcome by practice and experience.<<See "The Book of
Lies"; there are several chapters on this subject.  But
Right exaltation should produce spontaneously the proper
mental and physical reactions.  As soon as the development
is secured, there will be automatic reflex "justesse",
exactly as in normal affairs mind and body respond with free
unconscious rightness to the Will.>>
   In order to aid concentration, and to increase the supply
of Energy, it has been customary for the Magician to employ
assistants or colleagues.  It is doubtful whether the
obvious advantages of this plan compensate the difficulty of
procuring suitable persons<<The organic development of
Magick in the world due to the creative Will of the Master
Therion makes it with every year that passes easier to find
scientifically trained co-workers.>>, and the chance of a
conflict of will or a misunderstanding in the circle itself.
On one occasion FRATER PERDURABO was disobeyed by an
assistant, and had it not been for His promptitude in using
the physical compulsion of the sword, it is probable that
the circle would have been broken.  As it was, the affair
fortunately terminated in nothing more serious than the
destruction of the culprit.
   However, there is no doubt that an assemblage of persons
who really are in harmony can much more easily produce an
effect than a magician working by himself.  The psychology
of "Revival meetings" will be familiar to almost every one,
and though such {73} meetings<<See, for an account of
properly-conducted congregational ceremonial, Equinox I, IX.
"Energized Enthusiasm", and Equinox III, L. Liber XV,
Ecclesiae Gnosticae Catholicae Cannon Missae.  The "Revival
meetings" here in question were deliberate exploitations of
religious hysteria.>> are the foulest and most degraded
rituals of black magic, the laws of Magick are not thereby
suspended.  The laws of Magick are the laws of Nature.
   A singular and world-famous example of this is of
sufficiently recent date to be fresh in the memory of many
people now living.  At a nigger camp meeting in the "United"
States of America, devotees were worked up to such a pitch
of excitement that the whole assembly developed a furious
form of hysteria.  The comparatively intelligible cries of
"Glory" and "Hallelujah" no longer expressed the situation.
Somebody screamed out "Ta-ra-ra-boom-de-ay!", and this was
taken up by the whole meeting and yelled continuously, until
reaction set in.  The affair got into the papers, and some
particularly bright disciple of John Stuart Mill, logician
and economist, thought that these words, having set one set
of fools crazy, might do the same to all the other fools in
the world.  He accordingly wrote a song, and produced the
desired result.  This is the most notorious example of
recent times of the power exerted by a barbarous name of
evocation.
   A few words may be useful to reconcile the general notion
of Causality with that of Magick.  How can we be sure that a
person waving a stick and howling thereby produces
thunderstorms?  In no other way than that familiar to
Science; we note that whenever we put a lighted match to dry
gunpowder, an unintelligibly arbitrary phenomenon, that of
sound, is observed; and so forth.
   We need not dwell upon this point; but it seems worth
while to answer one of the objections to the possibility of
Magick, chosing one which is at first sight of an obviously
"fatal" character.  It is convenient to quote verbatim from
the Diary<<In a later entry we read that the diarist has
found a similar train of argument in "Space, Time, and
Gravitation", page 51.  He was much encourage by the
confirmation of his thesis in so independent a system of
thought.>> of a distinguished Magician and philosopher.
   "I have noticed that the effect of a Magical Work has
followed {74} it so closely that it must have been started
before the time of the Work.  E.g. I work to-night to make X
in Paris write to me.  I get the letter the next morning, so
that it must have been written before the Work.  Does this
deny that the Work caused the effect?
   "If I strike a billiard-ball and it moves, both my will
and its motion are due to causes long antecedent to the act.
I may consider both my Work and its reaction as twin effects
of the eternal Universe.  The moved arm and ball are parts
of a state of the Cosmos which resulted necessarily from its
momentarily previous state, and so, back for ever.
   "Thus, my Magical Work is only one of the cause-effects
necessarily concomitant with the case-effects which set the
ball in motion.  I may therefore regard the act of striking
as a cause-effect of my original Will to move the ball,
though necessarily previous to its motion.  But the case of
magical Work is not quite analogous.  For my nature is such
that I am compelled to perform Magick in order to make my
will to prevail; so that the cause of my doing the Work is
also the cause of the ball's motion, and there is no reason
why one should precede the other.  (CF. "Lewis Carroll,"
where the Red Queen screams before she pricks her finger.)
   "Let me illustrate the theory by an actual example.
   "I write from Italy to a man in France and another in
Australia on the same day, telling them to join me.  Both
arrive ten days later; the first in answer to my letter,
which he received, the second on "his own initiative", as it
would seem.  But I summoned him because I wanted him; and I
wanted him because he was my representative; and his
intelligence made him resolve to join me because it judged
rightly that the situation (so far as he knew it) was such
as to make me desire his presence.
   "The same cause, therefore, which made me write to him
made him come to me; and though it would be improper to say
that the writing of the letter was the direct cause of his
arrival, it is evident that if I had not written I should
have been different from what I actually am, and therefore
my relations with him would have been otherwise than they
are.  In this sense, therefore, the letter and the journey
are causally connected.
   "One cannot go farther, and say that in this case I ought
to write the letter even if he had arrived before I did so;
for it {75} is part of the whole set of circumstance that I
do not use a crowbar on an open door.
   "The conclusion is that one should do one's Will 'without
lust of result'.  If one is working in accordance with the
laws of one's own nature, one is doing 'right'; and no such
work can be criticised as 'useless', even in cases of the
character here discussed.  So long as one's Will prevails,
there is no cause for complaint.
   "To abandon one's Magick would shew lack of self-
confidence in one's powers, and doubt as to one's inmost
faith in Self and in Nature.<<i.e. on the ground that one
cannot understand how Magick can produce the desired
effects.  For if one possesses the inclination to do Magick,
it is evidence of a tendency in one's Nature.  Nobody
understands fully how the mind moves the muscles; but we
know that lack of confidence on this point means paralysis.
"If the Sun and Moon should doubt, They'd immediately go
out", as Blake said.  Also, as I said myself.  "Who hath the
How is careless of the Why".>>  Of course one changes one's
methods as experience indicates; but there is no need to
change them on any such ground as the above.
   "Further, the argument here set forth disposes of the
need to explain the "modus operandi" of Magick.  A
successful operation does not involve any theory soever, not
even that of the existence of causality itself.  The whole
set of phenomena may be conceived as single.
   "For instance, if I see a star (as it was years ago) I
need not assume causal relations as existing between it, the
earth, and myself.  The connexion exists; I can predicate
nothing beyond that.  I cannot postulate purpose, or even
determine the manner in which the event comes to be.
Similarly, when I do Magick, it is in vain to inquire why I
so act, or why the desired result does or does not follow.
Nor can I know how the previous and subsequent conditions
are connected.  At most I can describe the consciousness
which I interpret as a picture of the facts, and make
empirical generalizations of the superficial aspects of the
case.
 "Thus, I have my own personal impressions of the act of
telephoning; but I cannot be aware of what consciousness,
electricity, mechanics, sound, etc., actually are in
themselves.  And although I can appeal to experience to lay
down 'laws' as to what {76} conditions accompany the act, I
can never be sure that they have always been, or ever will
again be, identical.  (In fact, it is certain that an event
can never occur twice in precisely the same
circumstances.)<<If it did so, how could we call it
duplex?>>
 "Further, my 'laws; must always take nearly all the more
important elements of knowledge for granted.  I cannot say -
-- finally --- how an electric current is generated.  I
cannot be sure that some totally unsuspected force is not at
work in some entirely arbitrary way.  For example, it was
formerly supposed that Hydrogen and Chlorine would unite
when an electric spark was passed through the mixture; now
we 'know' that the presence of a minute quantity of aqueous
vapour (or some tertium quid) is essential to the reaction.
We formulated before the days of Ross the 'laws' of malarial
fever, without reference to the mosquito; we might discover
one day that the germ is only active when certain events are
transpiring in some nebula<<The history of the Earth is
included in the period of some such relation; so that we
cannot possibly be sure that we may deny: "Malarial fever is
a function of the present precession of the Equinoxes".>>,
or when so apparently inert a substance as Argon is present
in the air in certain proportions.
   "We may therefore admit quite cheerfully that Magick is
as mysterious as mathematics, as empirical as poetry, as
uncertain as golf, and as dependent on the personal equation
as Love.
   "That is no reason why we should not study, practice and
enjoy it; for it is a Science in exactly the same sense as
biology; it is no less an Art that Sculpture; and it is a
Sport as much as Mountaineering.
   "Indeed, there seems to be no undue presumption in urging
that no Science possesses equal possibilities of deep and
important Knowledge;<<Magick is less liable to lead to error
than any other Science, because its terms are
interchangeable, by definition, so that it is based on
relativity from the start.  We run no risk of asserting
absolute propositions.  Furthermore we make our measurements
in terms of the object measured, thus avoiding the absurdity
of defining metaphysical ideas by mutable standards, (Cf.
Eddington "Space, Time, and Gravitation". Prologue.) of
being forced to attribute the qualities of human
consciousness to inanimate things (Poincare, "La mesure du
temps"), and of asserting that we know anything of the
universe in itself, though the nature of our senses and our
minds necessarily determines our observations, so that the
limit of our knowledge is subjective, just as a thermometer
can record nothing but its own reaction to one particular
type of Energy.
   Magick recognizes frankly (1) that truth is relative,
subjective, and apparent; (2) that Truth implies
Omniscience, which is unattainable by mind, being
transfinite; just as if one tried to make an exact map of
England in England, that map must contain a map of the map,
and so on, ad infinitum; (3) that logical contradiction is
inherent in reason, (Russell, "Introduction to Mathematical
Philosophy", p. 136; Crowley, "Eleusis", and elsewhere); (4)
that a Continuum requires a Continuum to be commensurable
with it: (5) that Empiricism is ineluctable, and therefore
that adjustment is the only possible method of action; and
(6) that error may be avoided by opposing no resistance to
change, and registering observed phenomena in their own
language.>>that no Art offers such opportunities to the
ambition {77} of the Soul to express its Truth, in Ecstasy,
through Beauty; and that no Sport rivals its fascinations of
danger and delight, so excites, exercises, and tests its
devotees to the uttermost, or so rewards them by well-being,
pride, and the passionate pleasures of personal triumph.
   "Magick takes every thought and act for its apparatus; it
has the Universe for its Library and its Laboratory; all
Nature is its Subject; and its Game, free from close seasons
and protective restrictions, always abounds in infinite
variety, being all that exists.<<The elasticity of Magick
makes it equal to all possible kinds of environment, and
therefore biologically perfect.  "Do what thou wilt..."
implies self-adjustment, so that failure cannot occur.
One's true Will is necessarily fitted to the whole Universe
with the utmost exactitude, because each term in the
equation a+b+c=0 must be equal and opposite to the sum of
all the other terms.  No individual can ever be aught than
himself, or do aught else than his Will, which is his
necessary relation with his environment, dynamically
considered.  All error is no more than an illusion proper to
him to dissipate the mirage, and it is a general law that
the method of accomplishing this operation is to realize,
and to acquiesce in, the order of the Universe, and to
refrain from attempting the impossible task of overcoming
the inertia of the forces which oppose, and therefore are
identical with, one's self.  Error in thought is therefore
failure to understand, and in action to perform, one's own
true Will.>>

 {78}








                              CHAPTER X

                           OF THE GESTURES



   This chapter may be divided into the following parts:

1. Attitudes.
2. Circumambulations (and similar movements).
3. Changes of position (This depends upon the theory of the
construction of the circle).
4. The Knocks or Knells.

                                 I

   Attitudes are of two Kinds: natural and artificial.  Of
the first kind, prostration is the obvious example.  It
comes natural to man (poor creature!) to throw himself to
the ground in the presence of the object of his
adoration.<<The Magician must eschew prostration, or even
the "bending of the knee in supplication", as infamous and
ignominious, an abdication of his sovereignty.>>
   Intermediate between this and the purely artificial form
of gesture comes a class which depends on acquired habit.
Thus it is natural to an European officer to offer his sword
in token of surrender.  A Tibetan would, however, squat, put
out his tongue, and place his hand behind his right ear.
   Purely artificial gestures comprehend in their class the
majority of definitely magick signs, though some of these
simulate a natural action --- e.g. the sign of the Rending
of the Veil.  But the sign of Auramoth (see Equinox I, II,
Illustration "The Signs of the Grades") merely imitates a
hieroglyph which has only a remote connection with any fact
in nature.  All signs must of course be studied with
infinite patience, and practised until the connection {79}
between them and the mental attitude which they represent
appears "necessary."

                               II
   The principal movement in the circle is
circumambulation.<<In Part II of this Book 4 it was assumed
that the Magician went barefoot.  This would imply his
intention to make intimate contact with his Circle.  But he
may wear sandals, for the Ankh is a sandal-strap; it is born
by the Egyptian Gods to signify their power of Going, that
is their eternal energy.  By shape the Ankh (or Crux Ansata)
suggests the formula by which this going is effected in
actual practice.>>  This has a very definite result, but one
which is very difficult to describe.  An analogy is the
dynamo.  Circumambulation properly performed in combination
with the Sign of Horus (or "The Enterer") on passing the
East is one of the best methods of arousing the macrocosmic
force in the Circle.  It should never be omitted unless
there be some special reason against it.
   A particular tread seems appropriate to it.  This tread
should be light and stealthy, almost furtive, and yet very
purposeful.  It is the pace of the tiger who stalks the
deer.
   The number of circumambulations should of course
correspond to the nature of the ceremony.
   Another important movement is the spiral, of which there
are two principal forms, one inward, one outward.  They can
be performed in either direction; and, like the
circumambulation, if performed deosil<<i.e.  In the same
direction as the hands of a watch move.>> they invoke --- if
widdershins<<i.e.  In the opposite direction.>> they
banish<<Such, at least, is the traditional interpretation.
But there is a deeper design which may be expressed through
the direction of rotation.  Certain forces of the most
formidable character may be invoked by circumambulation
Widdershins when it is executed with intent toward them, and
the initiated technique.  Of such forces Typhon is the type,
and the war of the Titans against the Olympians the legend.
(Teitan, Titan, has in Greek the numerical value of 666.)
 WEH Addenda:  Crowley is using the spelling Tau-epsilon-
iota-tau-alpha-nu in place of the more usual Tau-iota-tau-
alpha-nu or Tau-alpha-iota-tau-alpha-nu to obtain 666 in
place of 661 or 662.>>.  In the spiral the tread is light
and tripping, almost approximating to a dance: while
performing it the magician will usually turn on his own
axis, either in the same direction as {80} the spiral, or in
the opposite direction.  Each combination involves a
different symbolism.
   There is also the dance proper; it has many different
forms, each God having his special dance.  One of the
easiest and most effective dances is the ordinary waltz-step
combined with the three signs of L.V.X.  It is much easier
to attain ecstasy in this way than is generally supposed.
The essence of the process consists in the struggle of the
Will against giddiness; but this struggle must be prolonged
and severe, and upon the degree of this the quality and
intensity of ecstasy attained may depend.
   With practice, giddiness is altogether conquered;
exhaustion then takes its place and the enemy of Will.  It
is through the mutual destruction of these antagonisms in
the mental and moral being of the magician that Samadhi is
begotten.

                              III
 Good examples of the use of change of position are given in
the manuscripts Z.1 and Z.3;<<Equinox I, II, pp. 244-260.>>
explanatory of the Neophyte Ritual of the G.'. D.'., where
the candidate is taken to various stations in the Temple,
each station having a symbolic meaning of its own; but in
pure invocation a better example is given in Liber
831<<Equinox I, VII, pp. 93 sqq.>>.
   In the construction of a ceremony an important thing to
decide is whether you will or will not make such movements.
For every Circle has its natural symbolism, and even if no
use is to be made of these facts, one must be careful not to
let anything be inharmonious with the natural
attributions.<<The practical necessities of the work are
likely to require certain movements.  One should either
exclude this symbolism altogether, or else think out
everything beforehand, and make it significant.  Do not let
some actions be symbolic and others haphazard.>>  For the
sensitive aura of the magician might be disturbed, and the
value of the ceremony completely destroyed, by the
embarrassment caused by the discovery of some such error,
just as if a pre-occupied T-totaller found that he had
strayed into a Temple of the Demon Rum!  It is therefore
impossible to neglect the theory of the Circle.  {81}
   To take a simple example, suppose that, in an Evocation
of Bartzabel, the planet Mars, whose sphere is Geburah
(Severity) were situated (actually, in the heavens) opposite
to the Square of Chesed (Mercy) of the Tau in the Circle,
and the triangle placed accordingly.  It would be improper
for the Magus to stand on that Square unless using this
formula, "I, from Chesed, rule Geburah through the Path of
the Lion"; while --- taking an extreme case --- to stand on
the square of Hod (which is naturally dominated by Geburah)
would be a madness which only a formula of the very highest
Magick could counteract.
   Certain positions, however, such as Tiphareth<<Tiphareth
is hardly "dominated" even by Kether.  It is the son rather
than the servant.>>, are so sympathetic to the Magus himself
that he may use them without reference to the nature of the
spirit, or of the operation; unless he requires an
exceptionally precise spirit free of all extraneous
elements, or one whose nature is difficulty compatible with
Tiphareth.
   To show how these positions may be used in conjunction
with the spirals, suppose that you are invoking Hathor,
Goddess of Love, to descend upon the Altar.  Standing on the
square of Netzach you will make your invocation to Her, and
then dance an inward spiral deosil ending at the foot of the
altar, where you sink on your knees with your arms raised
above the altar as if inviting Her embrace.<<But NOT "in
supplication".>>
 To conclude, one may add that natural artistic ability, of
you possess it, forms an excellent guide.  All Art is
Magick.
   Isadora Duncan has this gift of gesture in a very high
degree.  Let the reader study her dancing; if possible
rather in private than in public, and learn the superb
"unconsciousness" --- which is magical consciousness ---
with which she suits the action to the melody.<<This passage
was written in 1911 e.v. "Wake Duncan with thy Knocking?  I
would thou couldst!">>
   There is no more potent means than Art of calling forth
true Gods to visible appearance.  {82}


                              IV.
   The knocks or knells are all of the same character.  They
may be described collectively --- the difference between
them consists only in this, that the instrument with which
they are made seals them with its own special properties.
It is of no great importance (even so) whether they are made
by clapping the hands or stamping the feet, by strokes of
one of the weapons, or by the theoretically appropriate
instrument, the bell.  It may nevertheless be admitted that
they become more important in the ceremony if the Magician
considers it worth while to take up<<Any action not purely
rhythmical is a disturbance.>> an instrument whose single
purpose is to produce them.
 Let it first be laid down that a knock asserts a connection
between the Magician and the object which he strikes.  Thus
the use of the bell, or of the hands, means that the
Magician wishes to impress the atmosphere of the whole
circle with what has been or is about to be done.  He wishes
to formulate his will in sound, and radiate it in every
direction; moreover, to influence that which lives by breath
in the sense of his purpose, and to summon it to bear
witness to his Word.  The hands are used as symbols of his
executive power, the bell to represent his consciousness
exalted into music.  To strike with the wand is to utter the
fiat of creation; the cup vibrates with his delight in
receiving spiritual wine.  A blow with the dagger is like
the signal for battle.  The disk is used to express the
throwing down of the price of one's purchase.  To stamp with
the foot is to declare one's mastery of the matter in hand.
Similarly, any other form of giving knocks has its own
virtue.  From the above examples the intelligent student
will have perceived the method of interpreting each
individual case that may come in question.
   As above said, the object struck is the object impressed.
Thus, a blow upon the altar affirms that he has complied
with the laws of his operation.  To strike the lamp is to
summon the Light divine.  Thus for the rest.
   It must also be observed that many combinations of ideas
are made possible by this convention.  To strike the wand
within the cup is to apply the creative will to its proper
complement, and so {83} perform the Great Work by the
formula of Regeneration.  To strike with the hand on the
dagger declares that one demands the use of the dagger as a
tool to extend one's executive power.  The reader will
recall how Siegfried smote Nothung, the sword of Need, upon
the lance of Wotan.  By the action Wagner, who was
instructed how to apply magical formulae by one of the heads
of our Order, intended his hearers to understand that the
reign of authority and paternal power had come to an end;
that the new master of the world was intellect.
   The general object of a knock or a knell is to mark a
stage in the ceremony.  Sasaki Shigetz tells us in his essay
on Shinto that the Japanese are accustomed to clap their
hands four times "to drive away evil spirits".  He explains
that what really happens is that the sudden and sharp impact
of the sound throws the mind into an alert activity which
enables it to break loose from the obsession of its previous
mood.  It is aroused to apply itself aggressively to the
ideals which had oppressed it.  There is therefore a
perfectly rational interpretation of the psychological power
of the knock.
   In a Magical ceremony the knock is employed for much the
same purpose.  The Magician uses it like the chorus in a
Greek play.  It helps him to make a clean cut, to turn his
attention from one part of his work to the next.
   So much for the general character of the knock or knell.
Even this limited point of view offers great opportunities
to the resourceful Magician.  But further possibilities lie
to our hand.  It is not usually desirable to attempt to
convey anything except emphasis, and possibly mood, by
varying the force of the blow.  It is obvious, moreover,
that there is a natural correspondence between the hard loud
knock of imperious command on the one hand, and the soft
slurred knock of sympathetic comprehension on the other.  It
is easy to distinguish between the bang of the outraged
creditor at the front, and the hushed tap of the lover at
the bedroom, door.  Magical theory cannot here add
instruction to instinct.
   But a knock need not be single; the possible combinations
are evidently infinite.  We need only discuss the general
principles of determining what number of strokes will be
proper in any case, {84} and how we may interrupt any series
so as to express our idea by means of structure.
   The general rule is that a single knock has no special
significance as such, because unity is omniform.  It
represents Kether, which is the source of all things equally
without partaking of any quality by which we discriminate
one thing from another.  Continuing on these lines, the
number of knocks will refer to the Sephira or other idea
Qabalistically cognate with that number.  Thus, 7 knocks
will intimate Venus, 11 the Great Work, 17 the Trinity of
Fathers, and 19 the Feminine Principle in its most general
sense.
   Analyzing the matter a little further, we remark firstly
that a battery of too many knocks is confusing, as well as
liable to overweight the other parts of the ritual.  In
practice, 11 is about the limit.  It is usually not
difficult to arrange to cover all necessary ground with that
number.
   Secondly, each is so extensive in scope, and includes
aspects so diverse from a practical standpoint that our
danger lies in vagueness.  A knock should be well defined;
its meaning should be precise.  The very nature of knocks
suggests smartness and accuracy.  We must therefore devise
some means of making the sequence significant of the special
sense which may be appropriate.  Our only resource is in the
use of intervals.
   It is evidently impossible to attain great variety in the
smaller numbers.  But this fact illustrates the excellence
of our system.  There is only one way of striking 2 knocks,
and this fact agrees with the nature of Chokmah; there is
only one way of creating.  We can express only ourselves,
although we do so in duplex form.  But there are three ways
of striking 3 knocks, and these 3 ways correspond to the
threefold manner in which Binah can receive the creative
idea.  There are three possible types of triangle.  We may
understand an idea either as an unity tripartite, as an
unity dividing itself into a duality, or as a duality
harmonized into an unity.  Any of these methods may be
indicated by 3 equal knocks; 1 followed, after a pause, by
2; and 2 followed, after a pause, by 1.
   As the nature of the number becomes more complex, the
possible varieties increase rapidly.  There are numerous
ways of striking 6, each of which is suited to the nature of
the several {85} aspects of Tiphareth.  We may leave the
determination of these points to the ingenuity of the
student.
   The most generally useful and adaptable battery is
composed of 11 strokes.  The principal reasons for this are
as follows: "Firstly", 11 is the number of Magick in itself.
It is therefore suitable to all types of operation.
"Secondly", it is the sacred number par excellence of the
new Aeon.  As it is written in the Book of the Law: "...11,
as all their numbers who are of us."  "Thirdly", it is the
number of the letters of the word ABRAHADABRA, which is the
word of the Aeon.  The structure of this word is such that
it expresses the great Work, in every one of its aspects.
"Lastly", it is possible thereby to express all possible
spheres of operation, whatever their nature.  This is
effected by making an equation between the number of the
Sephira and the difference between that number and 11.  For
example, 2 Degree=9Square is the formula of the grade of
initiation corresponding to Yesod.  Yesod represents the
instability of air, the sterility of the moon; but these
qualities are balanced in it by the stability implied in its
position as the Foundation, and by its function of
generation.  This complex is further equilibrated by
identifying it with the number 2 of Chokmah, which possesses
the airy quality, being the Word, and the lunar quality,
being the reflection of the sun of Kether as Yesod is the
sun of Tiphareth.  It is the wisdom which is the foundation
by being creation.  This entire cycle of ideas is expressed
in the double formula 2 Degree = 9Square, 9 Degree =
2Square; and any of these ideas may be selected and
articulated by a suitable battery.
   We may conclude with a single illustration of how the
above principles may be put into practice.  Let us suppose
that the Magician contemplates an operation for the purpose
of helping his mind to resist the tendency to wander.  This
will be a work of Yesod.  But he must emphasize the
stability of that Sephira as against the Airy quality which
it possesses.  His first action will be to put the 9 under
the protection of the 2; the battery at this point will be 1-
9-1.  But this 9 as it stands is suggestive of the
changefulness of the moon.  It may occur to him to divide
this into 4 and 5, 4 being the number of fixity, law, and
authoritative power; and 5 that of courage, energy, and
triumph of the spirit {86} over the elements.  He will
reflect, moreover, that 4 is symbolic of the stability of
matter, while 5 expresses the same idea with regard to
motion.  At this stage the battery will appear as 1-2-5-2-1.
After due consideration he will probably conclude that to
split up the central 5 would tend to destroy the simplicity
of his formula, and decide to use it as it stands.  The
possible alternative would be to make a single knock the
centre of his battery as if he appealed to the ultimate
immutability of Kether, invoking that unity by placing a
fourfold knock on either side of it.  In this case, his
battery would be 1-4-1-4-1.  He will naturally have been
careful to preserve the balance of each part of the battery
against the corresponding part.  This would be particularly
necessary in an operation such as we have chosen for our
example.


 -----------


                              {87}






                           CHAPTER XI

               OF OUR LADY BABALON AND OF THE BEAST

                       WHEREON SHE RIDETH.

                ALSO CONCERNING TRANSFORMATIONS.


                                I

   The contents of this section, inasmuch as they concern
OUR LADY, are too important and too sacred to be printed.
They are only communicated by the Master Therion to chosen
pupils in private instruction.

                                   II

   The essential magical work, apart from any particular
operation, is the proper formation of the Magical Being or
Body of Light.  This process will be discussed at some
length in Chapter XVIII.
   We will here assume that the magician has succeeded in
developing his Body of Light until it is able to go anywhere
and do anything.  There will, however, be a certain
limitation to his work, because he has formed his magical
body from the fine matter of his own element.  Therefore,
although he may be able to penetrate the utmost recesses of
the heavens, or conduct vigorous combats with the most
unpronounceable demons of the pit, it may be impossible for
him to do as much as knock a vase from a mantelpiece.  His
magical body is composed of matter too tenuous to affect
directly the gross matter of which illusions such as tables
and chairs are made.<<The one really easy "physical"
operation which the Body of Light can perform is "Congressus
subtilis".  The emanations of the "Body of Desire" of the
material being whom one visits are, if the visit be
agreeable, so potent that one spontaneously gains substance
in the embrace.  There are many cases on record of Children
having been born as the result of such unions.  See the work
of De Sinistrari on Incubi and Succubi for a discussion of
analogous phenomena.>> {89}
   There has been a good deal of discussion in the past
within the Colleges of the Holy Ghost, as to whether it
would be quite legitimate to seek to transcend this
limitation.  One need not presume to pass judgment.  One can
leave the decision to the will of each magician.
   The Book of the Dead contains many chapters intended to
enable the magical entity of a man who is dead, and so
deprived (according to the theory of death then current) of
the material vehicle for executing his will, to take on the
form of certain animals, such as a golden hawk or a
crocodile, and in such form to go about the earth "taking
his pleasure among the living."<<See "The Book of Lies" Cap.
44, and The Collected Works of Aleister Crowley, Vol. III,
pp. 209-210, where occur paraphrased translations of certain
classical Egyptian rituals.>>  As a general rule, material
was supplied out of which he could construct the party of
the second part aforesaid, hereinafter referred to as the
hawk.
   We need not, however, consider this question of death.
It may often be convenient for the living to go about the
world in some such incognito.  Now, then, conceive of this
magical body as creative force, seeking manifestation; as a
God, seeking incarnation.
 There are two ways by which this aim may be effected.  The
first method is to build up an appropriate body from its
elements.  This is, generally speaking, a very hard thing to
do, because the physical constitution of any material being
with much power is, or at least should be, the outcome of
ages of evolution.  However, there is a lawful method of
producing an homunculus which is taught in a certain secret
organization, perhaps known to some of those who may read
this, which could very readily be adapted to some such
purpose as we are now discussing.
   The second method sounds very easy and amusing.  You take
some organism already existing, which happens to be suitable
to your purpose.  You drive out the magical being {89} which
inhabits it, and take possession.  To do this by force is
neither easy nor justifiable, because the magical being of
the other was incarnated in accordance with its Will.  And
"... thou hast no right but to do thy will."  One should
hardly strain this sentence to make one's own will include
the will to upset somebody else's will!<<Yet it might happen
that the Will of the other being was to invite the Magician
to indwell its instrument.>>  Moreover, it is extremely
difficult thus to expatriate another magical being; for
though, unless it is a complete microcosm like a human
being, it cannot be called a star, it is a little bit of a
star, and part of the body of Nuit.
   But there is no call for all this frightfulness.  There
is no need to knock the girl down, unless she refuses to do
what you want, and she will always comply if you say a few
nice things to her.<<Especially on the subject of the Wand
or the Disk.>>  You can always use the body inhabited by an
elemental, such as an eagle, hare, wolf, or any convenient
animal, by making a very simple compact.  You take over the
responsibility for the animal, thus building it up into your
own magical hierarchy.  This represents a tremendous gain to
the animal.<<This is the magical aspect of eating animal
food, and its justification, or rather the reconciliation of
the apparent contradiction between the carnivorous and
humanitarian elements in the nature of "Homo Sapiens".>>  It
completely fulfils its ambition by an alliance of this
extremely intimate sort with a Star.  The magician, on the
other hand, is able to transform and retransform himself in
a thousand ways by accepting a retinue of such adherents.
In this way the projection of the "astral" or Body of Light
may be made absolutely tangible and practical.  At the same
time, the magician must realise that in undertaking the
Karma of any elemental, he is assuming a very serious
responsibility.  The bond which unites him with that
elemental is love; and, though it is only a small part of
the outfit of a magician, it is the whole of the outfit of
the elemental.  He will, therefore, suffer intensely in case
of any error or misfortune occurring to his protegee.  This
feeling is rather peculiar.  It is quite instinctive with
the best men.  They {90} hear of the destruction of a city
of a few thousand inhabitants with entire callousness, but
then they hear of a dog having hurt its paw, they feel
Weltschmertz acutely.
   It is not necessary to say much more than this concerning
transformations.  Those to whom the subject naturally
appeals will readily understand the importance of what has
been said.  Those who are otherwise inclined may reflect
that a nod is as good as a wink to a blind horse.


                            -------


                                {91}






                            CHAPTER XII

           OF THE BLOODY SACRIFICE: AND MATTERS COGNATE.


   It is necessary for us to consider carefully the problems
connected with the bloody sacrifice, for this question is
indeed traditionally important in Magick.  Nigh all ancient
Magick revolves around this matter.  In particular all the
Osirian religions --- the rites of the Dying God --- refer
to this.  The slaying of Osiris and Adonis; the mutilation
of Attis; the cults of Mexico and Peru; the story of
Hercules or Melcarth; the legends of Dionysus and of Mithra,
are all connected with this one idea.  In the Hebrew
religion we find the same thing inculcated.  The first
ethical lesson in the Bible is that the only sacrifice
pleasing to the Lord is the sacrifice of blood; Abel, who
made this, finding favour with the Lord, while Cain, who
offered cabbages, was rather naturally considered a cheap
sport.  The idea recurs again and again.  We have the
sacrifice of the Passover, following on the story of
Abraham's being commanded to sacrifice his firstborn son,
with the idea of the substitution of animal for human life.
The annual ceremony of the two goats carries out this in
perpetuity.  And we see again the domination of this idea in
the romance of Esther, where Haman and Mordecai are the two
goats or gods; and ultimately in the presentation of the
rite of Purim in Palestine, where Jesus and Barabbas
happened to be the Goats in that particular year of which we
hear so much, without agreement on the date.
 This subject must be studied in the "Golden Bough", where
it is most learnedly set forth by Dr. J. G. Frazer.
   Enough has now been said to show that the bloody
sacrifice has from time immemorial been the most considered
part of Magick.  {92} The ethics of the thing appear to have
concerned no one; nor, to tell the truth, need they do so.
As St. Paul says, "Without shedding of blood there is no
remission"; and who are we to argue with St. Paul?  But,
after all that, it is open to any one to have any opinion
that he likes upon the subject, or any other subject, thank
God!  At the same time, it is most necessary to study the
business, whatever we may be going to do about it; for our
ethics themselves will naturally depend upon our theory of
the universe.  If we were quite certain, for example, that
everybody went to heaven when he died, there could be no
serious objection to murder or suicide, as it is generally
conceded --- by those who know neither --- that earth is not
such a pleasant place as heaven.
   However, there is a mystery concealed in this theory of
the bloody sacrifice which is of great importance to the
student, and we therefore make no further apology,  We
should not have made even this apology for an apology, had
it not been for the solicitude of a pious young friend of
great austerity of character who insisted that the part of
this chapter which now follows --- the part which was
originally written --- might cause us to be misunderstood.
This must not be.
   The blood is the life.  This simple statement is
explained by the Hindus by saying that the blood is the
principal vehicle of vital Prana.<<Prana or force" is often
used as a generic term for all kinds of subtle energy.  The
prana of the body is only one of its "vayus".  Vayu means
air or spirit.   The idea is that all bodily forces are
manifestations of the finer forces of the more real body,
this real body being a subtle and invisible thing.>>  There
is some ground for the belief that there is a definite
substance<<This substance need not be conceived as
"material" in the crude sense of Victorian science; we now
know that such phenomena as the rays and emanations of
radioactive substances occupy an intermediate position.  For
instance, mass is not, as once supposed, necessarily
impermeable to mass, and matter itself can be only
interpreted in terms of motion.  So, as to "prana", one
might hypothesize a phenomenon in the ether analogous to
isomerism.  We already know of bodies chemically identical
whose molecular structure makes one active, another
inactive, to certain reagents.  Metals can be "tired" or
even "killed" as to some of their properties, without
discoverable chemical change.  One can "kill" steel, and
"raise it from the dead"; and flies drowned in icewater can
be resuscitated.  That it should be impossible to create
high organic life is scientifically unthinkable, and the
Master Therion believes it to be a matter of few years
indeed before this is done in the laboratory.  Already we
restore the apparently drowned.  Why not those dead from
such causes as syncope?  If we understood the ultimate
physics and chemistry of the brief moment of death we would
get hold of the force in some say, supply the missing
element, reverse the electrical conditions or what not.
Already we prevent certain kinds of death by supplying
wants, as in the case of Thyroid.>>, not isolated as yet,
whose presence makes all {93} the difference between live
and dead matter.  We pass by with deserved contempt the
pseudo-scientific experiments of American charlatans who
claim to have established that weight is lost at the moment
of death, and the unsupported statements of alleged
clairvoyants that they have seen the soul issuing like a
vapour from the mouth of persons "in articulo mortis"; but
his experiences as an explorer have convinced the Master
Therion that meat loses a notable portion of its nutritive
value within a very few minutes after the death of the
animal, and that this loss proceeds with ever-diminishing
rapidity as time goes on.  It is further generally conceded
that live food, such as oysters, is the most rapidly
assimilable and most concentrated form of energy.<<Once can
become actually drunk on oysters, by chewing them
completely.  Rigor seems to be a symptom of the loss of what
I may call the Alpha-energy and makes a sharp break in the
curve.  The Beta and other energies dissipate more slowly.
Physiologists should make it their first duty to measure
these phenomena; for their study is evidently a direct line
of research into the nature of Life.  The analogy between
the living and complex molecules of the Uranium group of
inorganic and the Protoplasm group of organic elements is
extremely suggestive.  The faculties of growth, action, self-
recuperation, etc., must be ascribed to similar properties
in both cases; and as we have detected, measured and
partially explained radioactivity, it must be possible to
contrive means of doing the same for Life.>>  Laboratory
experiments in food-values seem to be almost worthless, for
reasons which we cannot here enter into; the general
testimony of mankind appears a safer guide.
   It would be unwise to condemn as irrational the practice
of those savages who tear the heart and liver from an
adversary, and devour them while yet warm.  In any case it
was the theory of {94} the ancient Magicians, that any
living being is a storehouse of energy varying in quantity
according to the size and health of the animal, and in
quality according to its mental and moral character.  At the
death of the animal this energy is liberated suddenly.
   The animal should therefore be killed<<It is a mistake to
suppose that the victim is injured.  On the contrary, this
is the most blessed and merciful of all deaths, for the
elemental spirit is directly built up into Godhead --- the
exact goal of its efforts through countless incarnations.
On the other hand, the practice of torturing animals to
death in order to obtain the elemental as a slave is
indefensible, utterly black magic of the very worst kind,
involving as it does a metaphysical basis of dualism.  There
is, however, no objection to dualism or black magic when
they are properly understood.  See the account of the Master
Therion's Great Magical Retirement by Lake Pasquaney, where
he "crucified a toad in the Basilisk abode".>> within the
Circle, or the Triangle, as the case may be, so that its
energy cannot escape.  An animal should be selected whose
nature accords with that of the ceremony --- thus, by
sacrificing a female lamb one would not obtain any
appreciate quantity of the fierce energy useful to a
Magician who was invoking Mars.  In such a case a ram<<A
wolf would be still better in the case of Mars.  See 777 for
the correspondences between various animals and the "32
Paths" of Nature.>> would be more suitable.  And this ram
should be virgin --- the whole potential of its original
total energy should not have been diminished in any
way.<<There is also the question of its magical freedom.
Sexual intercourse creates a link between its exponents, and
therefore a responsibility.>>  For the highest spiritual
working one must accordingly choose that victim which
contains the greatest and purest force.  A male child of
perfect innocence and high intelligence<<It appears from the
Magical Records of Frater Perdurabo that He made this
particular sacrifice on an average about 150 times every
year between 1912 e.v. and 1928 e.v.  Contrast J.K.Huyman's
"La-Bas", where a perverted form of Magic of an analogous
order is described.
   "It is the sacrifice of oneself spiritually.   And the
intelligence and innocence of that male child are the
perfect understanding of the Magician, his one aim, without
lust of result.  And male he must be, because what he
sacrifices is not the material blood, but his creative
power."  This initiated interpretation of the texts was sent
spontaneously by Soror I.W.E., for the sake of the younger
Brethern.
     WEH ADDENDA:  When Crowley speaks of sacrificing a male
child, his diaries and other writings indicate that he
thereby obfuscates the actual practice.  Crowley did this by
diversion of the act of sexual intercourse and other sexual
actions.  He considered contraception as human sacrifice.
There is no indication in any of his writings that he ever
performed infanticide.  In fact, Crowley was even against
abortion.>> is the most satisfactory and suitable victim.
{95}
 For evocations it would be more convenient to place the
blood of the victim in the Triangle --- the idea being that
the spirit might obtain from the blood this subtle but
physical substance which was the quintessence of its life in
such a manner as to enable it to take on a visible and
tangible shape.<<See Equinox (I, V.  Supplement: Tenth
Aethyr) for an Account of an Operation where this was done.
Magical phenomena of the creative order are conceived and
germinate in a peculiar thick velvet darkness, crimson,
purple, or deep blue, approximating black: as if it were
said, In the body of Our Lady of the Stars.
   See 777 for the correspondences of the various forces of
Nature with drugs, perfumes, etc.>>
   Those magicians who abject to the use of blood have
endeavored to replace it with incense.  For such a purpose
the incense of Abramelin may be burnt in large quantities.
Dittany of Crete is also a valuable medium.  Both these
incenses are very catholic in their nature, and suitable for
almost any materialization.
   But the bloody sacrifice, though more dangerous, is more
efficacious; and for nearly all purposes human sacrifice is
the best.  The truly great Magician will be able to use his
own blood, or possibly that of a disciple, and that without
sacrificing the physical life irrevocably.<<Such details,
however, may safely be left to the good sense of the
Student.  Experience here as elsewhere is the best teacher.
In the Sacrifice during Invocation, however, it may be said
without fear of contradiction that the death of the victim
should coincide with the supreme invocation.
    WEH addenda:  A sworn testimony by Crowley declares that
he held actual human sacrifice to physical death to be the
most efficacious, but that he never did such a thing.  On
the matter concerning death of the victim in invocation,
Crowley elsewhere enlarges that this is the ephemeral death
of the Ego.>>  An example of this sacrifice is given in
Chapter 44 of Liber 333.  This Mass may be recommended
generally for daily practice.
   One last word on this subject.  There is a Magical
operation of maximum importance: the Initiation of a New
Aeon.  When it becomes necessary to utter a Word, the whole
Planet must be bathed in blood.  Before man is ready to
accept the Law of Thelema, the Great War must be fought.
This Bloody Sacrifice is the critical point of the World-
{96}Ceremony of the Proclamation of Horus, the Crowned and
conquering Child, as Lord of the Aeon.<<Note: This paragraph
was written in the summer of 1911 e.v., just three years
before its fulfilment.>>
   This whole matter is prophesied in the Book of the Law
itself; let the student take note, and enter the ranks of
the Host of the Sun.

                              II
   There is another sacrifice with regard to which the
Adepts have always maintained the most profound secrecy.  It
is the supreme mystery of practical Magick.  Its name is the
Formula of the Rosy Cross.  In this case the victim is
always --- in a certain sense --- the Magician himself, and
the sacrifice must coincide with the utterance of the most
sublime and secret name of the God whom he wishes to invoke.
   Properly performed, it never fails of its effect.  But it
is difficult for the beginner to do it satisfactorily,
because it is a great effort for the mind to remain
concentrated upon the purpose of the ceremony.  The
overcoming of this difficulty lends most powerful aid to the
Magician.
   It is unwise for him to attempt it until he has received
regular initiation in the true<<It is here desirable to warn
the reader against the numerous false orders which have
impudently assumed the name of Rosicrucian.  The Masonic
Societas Rosicruciana is honest and harmless; and makes no
false pretences; if its members happen as a rule to be
pompous busy-bodies, enlarging the borders of their
phylacteries, and scrupulous about cleansing the outside of
the cup and the platter; if the masks of the Officers in
their Mysteries suggest the Owl, the Cat, the Parrot, and
the Cuckoo, while the Robe of their Chief Magus is a Lion's
Skin, that is their affair.  But those orders run by persons
"claiming" to represent the True Ancient Fraternity are
common swindles.  The representatives of the late S. L.
Mathers (Count McGregor) are the phosphorescence of the
rotten wood of a branch which was lopped off the tree at the
end of the 19th century.  Those of Papus (Dr. Encausse),
Stanislas de Guaita and Peladan, merit respect as serious,
but lack full knowledge and authority.  The "Ordo Rosae
Crucis" is a mass of ignorance and falsehood, but this may
be a deliberate device for masking itself.  The test of any
Order is its attitude towards the Law of Thelema.  The True
Order presents the True Symbols, but avoids attaching the
True Name thereto; it is only when the Postulant has taken
irrevocable Oaths and been received formally, that he
discovers what Fraternity he has joined.  If he have taken
false symbols for true, and find himself magically pledged
to a gang of rascals, so much the worse for him!>> Order of
the Rosy Cross, {97} and he must have taken the vows with
the fullest comprehension and experience of their meaning.
It is also extremely desirable that he should have attained
an absolute degree of moral emancipation<<This results from
the full acceptance of the Law of THELEMA, persistently put
into practice.>>, and that purity of spirit which results
from a perfect understanding both of the differences and
harmonies of the planes upon the Tree of Life.
   For this reason FRATER PERDURABO has never dared to use
this formula in a fully ceremonial manner, save once only,
on an occasion of tremendous import, when, indeed, it was
not He that made the offering, but ONE in Him.  For he
perceived a grave defect in his moral character which he has
been able to overcome on the intellectual plane, but not
hitherto upon higher planes.  Before the conclusion of
writing this book he will have done so.<<P.S. With the
happiest results.  P.>>
   The practical details of the Bloody Sacrifice may be
studied in various ethnological manuals, but the general
conclusions are summed up in Frazer's "Golden Bough", which
is strongly recommended to the reader.
   Actual ceremonial details likewise may be left to
experiment.  The method of killing is practically uniform.
The animal should be stabbed to the heart, or its throat
severed, in either case by the knife.  All other methods of
killing are less efficacious; even in the case of
Crucifixion death is given by stabbing.<<Yet one might
devise methods of execution appropriate to the Weapons:
Stabbing or clubbing for the Lance or Wand, Drowning or
poisoning for the Cup, Beheading for the Sword, Crushing for
the Disk, Burning for the Lamp, and so forth.>>
   One may remark that warm-blooded animals only are used as
victims: with two principal exceptions.  The first is the
serpent, which is only used in a very special Ritual;<<The
Serpent is not really killed; it is seethed in an
appropriate vessel; and it issues in due season refreshed
and modified, but still essentially itself.  The idea is the
transmission of life and wisdom from a vehicle which has
fulfilled its formula to one capable of further extension.
The development of a wild fruit by repeated plantings in
suitable soil is an analogous operation.
    WEH ADDENDA:  The serpent is the phallus.  The vessel
and the seething are likewise sub rosa.>> the second the
magical beetles of Liber Legis. (See Part IV.)  {98}
   One word of warning is perhaps necessary for the
beginner.  The victim must be in perfect health --- or its
energy may be as it were poisoned.  It must also not be too
large:<<The sacrifice (e.g.) of a bull is sufficient for a
large number of people; hence it is commonly made in public
ceremonies, and in some initiations, e.g. that of a King,
who needs force for his whole kingdom.  Or again, in the
Consecration of a Temple.
  See Lord Dunsany, "The Blessing of Pan" --- a noble and
most notable prophecy of Life's fair future.>> the amount of
energy disengaged is almost unimaginably great, and out of
all anticipated proportion to the strength of the animal.
Consequently, the Magician may easily be overwhelmed and
obsessed by the force which he has let loose; it will then
probably manifest itself in its lowest and most
objectionable form.  The most intense spirituality of
purpose<<This is a matter of concentration, with no ethical
implication.  The danger is that one may get something which
one does not want.  This is "bad" by definition.  Nothing is
in itself good or evil.  The shields of the Sabines which
crushed Tarpeia were not murderous to them, but the
contrary.  Her criticism of them was simply that they were
what she did not want in her Operation.>> is absolutely
essential to safety.
   In evocations the danger is not so great, as the Circle
forms a protection; but the circle in such a case must be
protected, not only by the names of God and the Invocations
used at the same time, but by a long habit of successful
defence.<<The habitual use of the Lesser Banishing Ritual of
the Pentagram (say, thrice daily) for months and years and
constant assumption of the God-form of Harpocrates (See
Equinox, I, II and Liber 333, cap. XXV for both of these)
should make the "real circle", i.e. the Aura of the Magus,
impregnable.
   This Aura should be clean-cut, resilient, radiant,
iridescent, brilliant, glittering.  "A Soap-bubble of razor-
steel, streaming with light from within" is my first attempt
at description; and is not bad, despite its incongruities:
P.
 "FRATER PERDURABO, on the one occasion on which I was able
to see Him as He really appears, was brighter than the Sun
at noon.  I fell instantly to the floor in swoon which
lasted several hours, during which I was initiated." Soror
A.'..  Cf. Rev. I, 12-17.>>  If you are easily disturbed or
alarmed, or if you have not yet overcome the tendency of the
mind to wander, it is not advisable for you to perform {99}
the "Bloody Sacrifice".<<The whole idea of the word
Sacrifice, as commonly understood, rests upon an error and
superstition, and is unscientific, besides being
metaphysically false.  The Law of Thelema has totally
changed the Point of View as to this matter.  Unless you
have thoroughly assimilated the Formula of Horus, it is
absolutely unsafe to meddle with this type of Magick.  Let
the young Magician reflect upon the Conservation of Matter
and of Energy.>>  Yet it should not be forgotten that this,
and that other art at which we have dared darkly to hint,
are the supreme formulae of Practical Magick.
   You are also likely to get into trouble over this chapter
unless you truly comprehend its meaning.<<There is a
traditional saying that whenever an Adept seems to have made
a straightforward, comprehensible statement, then is it most
certain that He means something entirely different.  The
Truth is nevertheless clearly set forth in His Words: it is
His simplicity that baffles the unworthy.  I have chosen the
expressions in this Chapter in such a way that it is likely
to mislead those magicians who allow selfish interests to
cloud their intelligence, but to give useful hints to such
as are bound by the proper Oaths to devote their powers to
legitimate ends. "...thou hast no right but to do thy will."
"It is a lie, this folly against self."  The radical error
of all uninitiates is that they define "self" as
irreconcilably opposed to "not-self."  Each element of
oneself is, on the contrary, sterile and without meaning,
until it fulfils itself, by "love under will", in its
counterpart in the Macrocosm.  To separate oneself from
others is to destroy oneself; the way to realize and to
extend oneself is to lose that self --- its sense of
separateness --- in the other.  Thus: Child plus food: this
does not preserve one at the expense of the other; it
"destroys" or rather changes both in order to fulfil both in
the result of the operation --- a grown man.  It is in fact
impossible to preserve anything as it is by positive action
upon it.  Its integrity demands inaction; and inaction,
resistance to change, is stagnation, death and dissolution
due to the internal putrefaction of the starved elements.>>


                           ---------


 {100}







                           CHAPTER XIII

                        OF THE BANISHINGS:

                     AND OF THE PURIFICATIONS.


 Cleanliness is next to Godliness, and had better come
first.  Purity means singleness.  God is one.  The wand is
not a wand if it has something sticking to it which is not
an essential part of itself.  If you wish to invoke Venus,
you do not succeed if there are traces of Saturn mixed up
with it.
   That is a mere logical commonplace: in magick one must go
much farther than this.  One finds one's analogy in
electricity.  If insulation is imperfect, the whole current
goes back to earth.  It is useless to plead that in all
those miles of wire there is only one-hundredth of an inch
unprotected.  It is no good building a ship if the water can
enter, through however small a hole.
    That first task of the Magician in every ceremony is
therefore to render his Circle absolutely impregnable.<<See,
however, the Essay on Truth in "Konx om Pax".  The Circle
(in one aspect) asserts Duality, and emphasizes Division.>>
If one littlest thought intrude upon the mind of the Mystic,
his concentration is absolutely destroyed; and his
consciousness remains on exactly the same level as the
Stockbroker's.  Even the smallest baby is incompatible with
the virginity of its mother.  If you leave even a single
spirit within the circle, the effect of the conjuration will
be entirely absorbed by it.<<While one remains exposed to
the action of all sorts of forces they more or less
counterbalance each other, so that the general equilibrium,
produced by evolution, is on the whole maintained.  But if
we suppress all but one, its action becomes irresistible.
Thus, the pressure of the atmosphere would crush us if we
"banished" that of our bodies; and we should crumble to dust
if we rebelled successfully against cohesion.  A man who is
normally an "allround good sort" often becomes intolerable
when he gets rid of his collection of vices; he is swept
into monomania by the spiritual pride which had been
previously restrained by countervailing passions.  Again,
there is a worse draught when an ill-fitting door is closed
than when it stands open.  It is not as necessary to protect
his mother and his cattle from Don Juan as it was from the
Hermits of the Thebaid.>>  {101}
   The Magician must therefore take the utmost care in the
matter of purification, "firstly", of himself, "secondly",
of his instruments, "thirdly", of the place of working.
Ancient Magicians recommended a preliminary purification of
from three days to many months.  During this period of
training they took the utmost pains with diet.  They avoided
animal food, lest the elemental spirit of the animal should
get into their atmosphere.  They practised sexual
abstinence, lest they should be influenced in any way by the
spirit of the wife.  Even in regard to the excrements of the
body they were equally careful; in trimming the hair and
nails, they ceremonially destroyed<<Such destruction should
be by burning or other means which produces a complete
chemical change.  In so doing care should be taken to bless
and liberate the native elemental of the thing burnt.  This
maxim is of universal application.>> the severed portion.
They fasted, so that the body itself might destroy anything
extraneous to the bare necessity of its existence.  They
purified the mind by special prayers and conservations.
They avoided the contamination of social intercourse,
especially the conjugal kind; and their servitors were
disciples specially chosen and consecrated for the work.
   In modern times our superior understanding of the
essentials of this process enables us to dispense to some
extent with its external rigours; but the internal
purification must be even more carefully performed.  We may
eat meat, provided that in doing so we affirm that we eat it
in order to strengthen us for the special purpose of our
proposed invocation.<<In an Abbey of Thelema we say "Will"
before a meal.  The formula is as follows.  "Do what thou
wilt shall be the whole of the Law."  "What is thy Will?"
"It is my will to eat and drink"  "To what end?"  "That my
body may be fortified thereby."  "To what end?"  "That I may
accomplish the Great Work."  "Love is the law, love under
will."  "Fall to!"  This may be adapted as a monologue.  One
may also add the inquiry "What is the Great Work?" and
answer appropriately, when it seems useful to specify the
nature of the Operation in progress at the time.  The point
is to seize every occasion of bringing every available force
to bear upon the objective of the assault.  It does not
matter what the force is (by any standard of judgment) so
long as it plays its proper part in securing the success of
the general purpose.  Thus, even laziness may be used to
increase our indifference to interfering impulses, or envy
to counteract carelessness.  See Liber CLXXV, Equinox I,
VII, p. 37.  This is especially true, since the forces are
destroyed by the process.  That is, one destroys a complex
which in itself is "evil" and puts its elements to the one
right use.>>  {102}
   By thus avoiding those actions which might excite the
comment of our neighbours we avoid the graver dangers of
falling into spiritual pride.
   We have understood the saying: "To the pure all things
are pure", and we have learnt how to act up to it.  We can
analyse the mind far more acutely than could the ancients,
and we can therefore distinguish the real and right feeling
from its imitations.  A man may eat meat from self-
indulgence, or in order to avoid the dangers of asceticism.
We must constantly examine ourselves, and assure ourselves
that every action is really subservient to the One Purpose.
   It is ceremonially desirable to seal and affirm this
mental purity by Ritual, and accordingly the first operation
in any actual ceremony is bathing and robing, with
appropriate words.  The bath signifies the removal of all
things extraneous to antagonistic to the one thought.  The
putting on of the robe is the positive side of the same
operation.  It is the assumption of the fame of mind
suitable to that one thought.
   A similar operation takes place in the preparation of
every instrument, as has been seen in the Chapter devoted to
that subject.  In the preparation of the place of working,
the same considerations apply.  We first remove from that
place all objects; and we then put into it those objects,
and only those {103} objects, which are necessary.  During
many days we occupy ourselves in this process of cleansing
and consecration; and this again is confirmed in the actual
ceremony.
   The cleansed and consecrated Magician takes his cleansed
and consecrated instruments into that cleansed and
consecrated place, and there proceeds to repeat that double
ceremony in the ceremony itself, which has these same two
main parts.  The first part of every ceremony is the
banishing; the second, the invoking.  The same formula is
repeated even in the ceremony of banishing itself, for in
the banishing ritual of the pentagram we not only command
the demons to depart, but invoke the Archangels and their
hosts to act as guardians of the Circle during our pre-
occupation with the ceremony proper.
   In more elaborate ceremonies it is usual to banish
everything by name.  Each element, each planet, and each
sign, perhaps even the Sephiroth themselves; all are
removed, including the very one which we wished to invoke,
for that forces as existing in Nature is always impure.  But
this process, being long and wearisome, is not altogether
advisable in actual working.  It is usually sufficient to
perform a general banishing, and to rely upon the aid of the
guardians invoked.  Let the banishing therefore be short,
but in no wise slurred --- for it is useful as it tends to
produce the proper attitude of mind for the invocations.
"The Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram" (as now rewritten,
Liber 333, Cap. XXV) is the best to use.<<See also the
Ritual called "The Mark of the Beast" given in an Appendix.
But this is pantomorphous.>>  Only the four elements are
specifically mentioned, but these four elements contain the
planets and the signs<<The signs and the planets, of course,
contain, the elements.  It is important to remember this
fact, as it helps one to grasp what all these terms really
mean.  None of the "Thirty-two Paths" is a simple idea; each
one is a combination, differentiated from the others by its
structure and proportions.  The chemical elements are
similarly constituted, as the critics of Magick have at last
been compelled to admit.>> --- the four elements are
Tetragrammaton; and Tetragrammaton is the Universe.  This
special precaution is, however, necessary: make exceedingly
sure that the ceremony of banishing is effective!  {104} Be
alert and on your guard!  Watch before you pray!  The
feeling of success in banishing, once acquired, is
unmistakable.
   At the conclusion, it is usually well to pause for a few
moments, and to make sure once more that every thing
necessary to the ceremony is in its right place.  The
Magician may then proceed to the final consecration of the
furniture of the Temple.<<That is, of the special
arrangement of that furniture.  Each object should have been
separately consecrated beforehand.  The ritual here in
question should summarize the situation, and devote the
particular arrangement to its purpose by invoking the
appropriate forces.  Let it be well remembered that each
object is bound by the Oaths of its original consecration as
such.  Thus, if a pantacle has been made sacred to Venus, it
cannot be used in an operation of Mars; the Energy of the
Exorcist would be taken up in overcoming the opposition of
the "Karma" or inertia therein inherent.>>


                             ---------


                              {105}



                           CHAPTER XIV



                       OF THE CONSECRATIONS:

                       WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE

               NATURE AND NURTURE OF THE MAGICAL LINK.


                                 I


   Consecration is the active dedication of a thing to a
single purpose.  Banishing prevents its use for any other
purpose, but it remains inert until consecrated.
Purification is performed by water, and banishing by air,
whose weapon is the sword.  Consecration is performed by
fire, usually symbolised by the holy lamp.<<The general
conception is that the three active elements co-operate to
affect earth; but earth itself may be employed as an
instrument.  Its function is solidification.  The use of the
Pentacle is indeed very necessary in some types of
operation, especially those whose object involves
manifestation in matter, and the fixation in (more or less)
permanent form of the subtle forces of Nature.>>
   In most extant magical rituals the two operations are
performed at once; or (at least) the banishing has the more
important place, and greater pains seem to be taken with it;
but as the student advances to Adeptship the banishing will
diminish in importance, for it will no longer be so
necessary.  The Circle of the Magician will have been
perfected by his habit of Magical work.  In the truest sense
of that word, he will never step outside the Circle during
his whole life.  But the consecration, being the application
of a positive force, can always be raised to a closer
approximation to perfection.  Complete success in banishing
is soon attained; but there can be no completeness in the
advance to holiness.  {106}
   The method of consecration is very simple.  Take the
wand, or the holy oil, and draw upon the object to be
consecrated the supreme symbol of the force to which you
dedicate it.  Confirm this dedication in words, invoking the
appropriate God to indwell that pure temple which you have
prepared for Him.  Do this with fervour and love, as if to
balance the icy detachment which is the proper mental
attitude for banishing.<<The Hebrew legends furnish us with
the reason for the respective virtues of water and fire.
The world was purified by water at the Deluge, and will be
consecrated by fire at the last Judgment.  Not until that is
finished can the "real ceremony" begin.>>
 The words of purification are: Asperges me, Therion,
hyssopo, et mundabor; lavabis me, et super nivem dealbabor.
   Those of consecration are: Accendat in nobis Therion
ignem sui amoris et flammam aeternae caritatis.<<These may
now advantageously be replaced by (a) "... pure will,
unassuaged of purpose, delivered from the lust of result, is
every way perfect." (CCXX, I, 44) to banish; and (b) "I am
uplifted in thine heart; and the kisses of the stars rain
hard upon thy body." (CCXX, II, 62) to consecrate.  For the
Book of the Law contains the Supreme Spells.>>
   These, as initiates of the VII Degree of O.T.O. are
aware, mean more than appears.

                                II
   It is a strange circumstance that no Magical writer has
hitherto treated the immensely important subject of the
Magical Link.  It might almost be called the Missing Link.
It has apparently always been taken for granted, only lay
writers on Magick like Dr. J. G. Frazer have accorded the
subject its full importance.
   Let us try to make considerations of the nature of Magick
in a strictly scientific spirit, as well as, deprived of the
guidance of antiquity, we may.
   What is a Magical Operation?  It may be defined as any
event in nature which is brought to pass by Will.  We must
not exclude potato-growing or banking from our definition.
{107}
   Let us take a very simple example of a Magical Act: that
of a man blowing his nose.  What are the conditions of the
success of the Operation? Firstly, that the man's Will
should be to blow his nose; secondly, that he should have a
nose capable of being blown; thirdly, that he should have at
command an apparatus capable of expressing his spiritual
Will in terms of material force, and applying that force to
the object which he desires to affect.  His Will may be as
strong and concentrated as that of Jupiter, and his nose may
be totally incapable of resistance; but unless the link is
made by the use of his nerves and muscles in accordance with
psychological, physiological, and physical law, the nose
will remain unblown through all eternity.
   Writers of Magick have been unsparing in their efforts to
instruct us in the preparation of the Will, but they seem to
have imagined that no further precaution was necessary.
There is a striking case of an epidemic of this error whose
history is familiar to everybody.  I refer to Christian
Science, and the cognate doctrines of "mental healing" and
the like.  The theory of such people, stripped of dogmatic
furbelows, is perfectly good Magic of its kind, its negroid
kind.  The idea is correct enough: matter is an illusion
created by Will through mind, and consequently susceptible
of alteration at the behest of its creator.  But the
practice has been lacking.  They have not developed a
scientific technique for applying the Will.  It is as if
they expected the steam of Watts' kettle to convey people
from place to place without the trouble of inventing and
using locomotives.
   Let us apply these considerations to Magick in its
restricted sense, the sense in which it was always
understood until the Master Therion extended it to cover the
entire operations of Nature.
   What is the theory implied in such rituals as those of
the Goetia?  What does the Magician do?  He applies himself
to invoke a God, and this God compels the appearance of a
spirit whose function is to perform the Will of the magician
at the moment.  There is no trace of what may be called
machinery in the method.  The exorcist hardly takes the
pains of preparing a material basis for the spirit to
incarnate except the bare connection {108} of himself with
his sigil.  It is apparently assumed that the spirit already
possesses the means of working on matter.  The conception
seems to be that of a schoolboy who asks his father to tell
the butler to do something for him.  In other words, the
theory is grossly animistic.  The savage tribes described by
Frazer had a far more scientific theory.  The same may be
said of witches, who appear to have been wiser than the
thaumaturgists who despised them.  They at least made waxen
images --- identified by baptism --- of the people they
wished to control.  They at least used appropriate bases for
Magical manifestations, such as blood and other vehicles of
animal force, with those of vegetable virtue such as herbs.
They were also careful to put their bewitched products into
actual contact --- material or astral --- with their
victims.  The classical exorcists, on the contrary, for all
their learning, were careless about this essential
condition.  They acted as stupidly as people who should
write business letters and omit to post them.
   It is not too much to say that this failure to understand
the conditions of success accounts for the discredit into
which Magick fell until Eliphas Levi undertook the task of
re-habilitating it two generations ago.  But even he
(profoundly as he studied, and luminously as he expounded,
the nature of Magick considered as a universal formula) paid
no attention whatever to that question of the Magical Link,
though he everywhere implies that it is essential to the
Work.  He evaded the question by making the "petitio
principii" of assigning to the Astral Light the power of
transmitting vibrations of all kinds.  He nowhere enters
into detail as to how its effects are produced.  He does not
inform us as to the qualitative or quantitative laws of this
light.  (The scientifically trained student will observe the
analogy between Levi's postulate and that of ordinary
science "in re" the luminiferous ether.)
   It is deplorable that nobody should have recorded in a
systematic form the results of our investigations of the
Astral Light.  We have no account of its properties or of
the laws which obtain in its sphere.  Yet these are
sufficiently remarkable.  We may briefly notice that, in the
Astral Light, two or more objects can {109} occupy the same
space at the same time without interfering with each other
or losing their outlines.
   In that Light, objects can change their appearance
completely without suffering change of Nature.  The same
thing can reveal itself in an infinite number of different
aspects; in fact, it identifies itself by so doing, much as
a writer or a painter reveals himself in a succession of
novels or pictures, each of which is wholly himself and
nothing else, but himself under varied conditions, though
each appears utterly different from its fellows.  In that
Light one is "swift without feet and flying without wings";
one can travel without moving, and communicate without
conventional means of expression.  One is insensible to
heat, cold, pain, and other forms of apprehension, at least
in the shapes which are familiar to us in our bodily
vehicles.  They exist, but they are appreciated by us, and
they affect us, in a different manner.  In the Astral Light
we are bound by what is, superficially, an entirely
different series of laws.  We meet with obstacles of a
strange and subtle character; and we overcome them by an
energy and cunning of an order entirely alien to that which
serves us in earthly life.  In that Light, symbols are not
conventions but realities, yet (on the contrary) the beings
whom we encounter are only symbols of the realities of our
own nature.  Our operations in that Light are really the
adventures of our own personified thoughts.  The universe is
a projection of ourselves; an image as unreal as that of our
faces in a mirror, yet, like that face, the necessary form
of expression thereof, not to be altered save as we alter
ourselves.<<This passage must not be understood as asserting
that the Universe is purely subjective.  On the contrary,
the Magical Theory accepts the absolute reality of all
things in the most objective sense.  But all perceptions are
neither the observer nor the observed; they are
representations of the relation between them.  We cannot
affirm any quality in an object as being independent of our
sensorium, or as being in itself that which it seems to us.
Nor can we assume that what we cognize is more than a
partial phantom of its cause.  We cannot even determine the
meaning of such ideas as motion, or distinguish between time
and space, except in relation to some particular observer.
For example, if I fire a cannon twice at an interval of 3
hours, an observer on the Sun would note a difference of
some 200,000 miles in space between the shots, while to me
they seem "in the same place."  Moreover, I am incapable of
perceiving any phenomenon except by means of the arbitrary
instruments of my senses; it is thus correct to say that the
Universe as I know it is subjective, without denying its
objectivity.>>  The mirror may {110} be distorted, dull,
clouded, or cracked; and to this extent, the reflection of
ourselves may be false even in respect of its symbolic
presentation.  In that Light, therefore, all that we do is
to discover ourselves by means of a sequence of
hieroglyphics, and the changes which we apparently operate
are in an objective sense illusions.
   But the Light servers us in this way.  It enables us to
see ourselves, and therefore to aid us to initiate ourselves
by showing us what we are doing.  In the same way a
watchmaker uses a lens, though it exaggerates and thus
falsifies the image of the system of wheels which he is
trying to adjust.  In the same way, a writer employs
arbitrary characters according to a meaningless convention
in order to enable his reader by retranslating them to
obtain an approximation to his idea.
   Such are a few of the principal characteristics Astral
Light.  Its quantitative laws are much less dissimilar from
those of material physics.  Magicians have too often been
foolish enough to suppose that all classes of Magical
Operations were equally easy.  They seem to have assumed
that the "almighty power of God" was an infinite quantity in
presence of which all finites were equally insignificant.
"One day is with the Lord as a thousand years" is their
first law of Motion.  "Faith can move mountains" they say,
and disdain to measure either the faith or the mountains.
If you can kill a chicken by Magick, why not destroy an army
with equal exertion? "With God all things are possible."
   This absurdity is an error of the same class as that
mentioned above.  The facts are wholly opposed.  Two and two
make four in the Astral as rigorously as anywhere else.  The
distance of one's Magical target and the accuracy of one's
Magical rifle are factors in the success of one's Magical
shooting in just the same way as at Bisley.  The law of
Magical gravitation is as rigid as that of Newton.  The law
of Inverse Squares may not apply; but some {111} such law
does apply.  So it is for everything.  You cannot produce a
thunderstorm unless the materials exist in the air at the
time, and a Magician who could make rain in Cumberland might
fail lamentably in the Sahara.  One might make a talisman to
win the love of a shop-girl and find it work, yet be baffled
in the case of a countess; or vice versa.  One might impose
one's Will on a farm, and be crushed by that of a city; or
vice versa.  The MASTER THERION himself, with all his
successes in every kind of Magick, sometimes appears utterly
impotent to perform feats which almost any amateur might do,
because He has matched his Will against that of the world,
having undertaken the Work of a Magus to establish the word
of His Law on the whole of mankind.  He will succeed,
without doubt, but He hardly expects to see more than a
sample of His product during His present incarnation.  But
He refuses to waste the least fraction of His force on works
foreign to His WORK, however obvious it may seem to the
onlooker that His advantage lies in commanding stones to
become bread, or otherwise making things easy for Himself.
   These considerations being thoroughly understood we may
return to the question of making the Magical Link.  In the
case above cited FRATER PERDURABO composed His talisman by
invoking His Holy Guardian Angel according to the Sacred
Magick of Abramelin the Mage.  That Angel wrote on the lamen
the Word of the Aeon.  The Book of the Law is this writing.
To this lamen the Master Therion gave life by devoting His
own life thereto.  We may then regard this talisman, the
Law, as the most powerful that has been made in the world's
history, for previous talismans of the same type have been
limited in their scope by conditions of race and country.
Mohammed's talisman, Allah, was good only from Persia to the
Pillars of Hercules.  The Buddha's, Anatta, operated only in
the South and East of Asia.  The new talisman, Thelema, is
master of the planet.
   But now observe how the question of the Magical Link
arises!  No matter how mighty the truth of Thelema, it
cannot prevail unless it is applied to any by mankind.  As
long as the Book of the Law was in Manuscript, it could only
affect the small group amongst whom it was circulated.  It
had to be put into action by {112} the Magical Operation of
publishing it.  When this was done, it was done without
proper perfection.  Its commands as to how the work ought to
be done were not wholly obeyed.  There were doubt and
repugnance in FRATER PERDURABO's mind, and they hampered His
work.  He was half-hearted.  Yet, even so then intrinsic
power of the truth of the Law and the impact of the
publication were sufficient to shake the world so that a
critical war broke out, and the minds of men were moved in a
mysterious manner.  The second blow was struck by the re-
publication of the Book in September 1913, and this time the
might of this Magick burst out and caused a catastrophe to
civilization.  At this hour, the MASTER THERION is
concealed, collecting his forces for a final blow.  When The
Book of the Law and its Comment is published, with the
forces of His whole Will in perfect obedience to the
instructions which have up to now been misunderstood or
neglected, the result will be incalculably effective.  The
event will establish the kingdom of the Crowned and
Conquering Child over the whole earth, and all men shall bow
to the Law, which is "love under will".
   This is an extreme case; but there is one law only to
govern the small as the great.  The same laws describe and
measure the motions of the ant and the stars.  Their light
is no swifter than that of a spark.  In every operation of
Magick the link must be properly made.  The first requisite
is the acquisition of adequate force of the kind required
for the purpose.  We must have electricity of a certain
potential in sufficient amount if we wish to heat food in a
furnace.  We shall need a more intense current and a greater
supply to light a city than to charge a telephone wire.  No
other kind of force will do.  We cannot use the force of
steam directly to impel an aeroplane, or to get drunk.  We
must apply it in adequate strength in an appropriate manner.
   It is therefore absurd to invoke the spirit of Venus to
procure us the love of an Empress, unless we take measures
to transmit the influence of our work to the lady.  We may
for example consecrate a letter expressing our Will; or, if
we know how, we may use some object connected with the
person whose acts we are attempting to control, such as a
lock of hair or a handkerchief {113} once belonging to her,
and so in subtile connection with her aura.  But for
material ends it is better to have material means.  We must
not rely on fine gut in trolling for salmon.  Our will to
kill a tiger is poorly conveyed by a charge of small shot
fired at a range of one hundred yards.  Our talisman must,
therefore, be an object suitable to the nature of our
Operation, and we must have some such means of applying its
force to such a way as will naturally compel the obedience
of the portion of Nature which we are trying to change.  If
one will the death of a sinner, it is not sufficient to hate
him, even if we grant that the vibrations of thought, when
sufficiently powerful and pure, may modify the Astral light
sufficiently to impress its intention to a certain extent on
such people as happen to be sensitive.  It is much surer to
use one's mind and muscle in service of that hate by
devising and making a dagger, and then applying the dagger
to the heart of one's enemy.  One must give one's hate a
bodily form of the same order as that which one's enemy has
taken for his manifestation.  Your spirit can only come into
contact with his by means of this magical manufacture of
phantoms; in the same way, one can only measure one's mind
(a certain part of it) against another man's by expressing
them in some such form as the game of chess.  One cannot use
chessmen against another man unless he agree to use them in
the same sense as you do.  The board and men form the
Magical Link by which you can prove your power to constrain
him to yield.  The game is a device by which you force him
to turn down his king in surrender, a muscular act made in
obedience to your will, thought he may be twice your weight
and strength.
   These general principles should enable the student to
understand the nature of the work of making the Magical
Link.  It is impossible to give detailed instructions,
because every case demands separate consideration.  It is
sometimes exceedingly difficult to devise proper measures.
   Remember that Magick includes all acts soever.  Anything
may serve as a Magical weapon.  To impose one's Will on a
nation, for instance, one's talisman may be a newspaper,
one's triangle a church, or one's circle a Club.  To win a
woman, one's {114} pantacle may be a necklace; to discover a
treasure, one's wand may be a dramatist's pen, or one's
incantation a popular song.
   Many ends, many means: it is only important to remember
the essence of the operation, which is to will its success
with sufficiently pure intensity, and to incarnate that will
in a body suitable to express it, a body such that its
impact on the bodily expression of the idea one wills to
change is to cause it to do so.  For instance, is it my will
to become a famous physician?  I banish all "hostile
spirits" such as laziness, alien interests, and confliction
pleasures, from my "circle" the hospital; I consecrate my
"weapons" (my various abilities) to the study of medicine; I
invoke the "Gods" (medical authorities) by studying and
obeying their laws in their books.  I embody the "Formulae"
(the ways in which causes and effects influence disease) in
a "Ritual" (my personal style of constraining sickness to
conform with my will).  I persist in these conjurations year
after year, making the Magical gestures of healing the sick,
until I compel the visible appearance of the Spirit of Time,
and make him acknowledge me his master.  I have used the
appropriate kind of means, in adequate measure, and applied
them in ways pertinent to my purpose by projecting my
incorporeal idea of ambition in a course of action such as
to induce in others the incorporeal idea of satisfying mine.
I made my Will manifest to sense; sense swayed the Wills of
my fellowmen; mind wrought on mind through matter.
   I did not "sit for" a medical baronetcy by wishing I had
it, or by an "act of faith", or by praying to God "to move
Pharaoh's heart", as our modern mental, or our mediaeval,
mystic, miracle-mongers were and are muddlers and maudlin
enough to advise us to do.
   A few general observations on the Magical Link may not be
amiss, in default of details; one cannot make a Manual of
How to Go Courting, with an Open-Sesame to each particular
Brigand's Cavern, any more than one can furnish a budding
burglar with a directory containing the combination of every
existing safe.  But one can point out the broad distinctions
between women who yield, some to flattery, some to
eloquence, some to appearance, some to rank, some to wealth,
some to ardour, and some to authority.  We {115} cannot
exhaust the combinations of Lover's Chess, but we may
enumerate the principal gambits: the Bouquet, the
Chocolates, the Little Dinner, the Cheque-Book, the Poem,
the Motor by Moonlight, the Marriage Certificate, the Whip,
and the Feigned Flight.
   The Magical Link may be classified under three main
heads; as it involves (1) one plane and one person, (2) one
plane and two or more persons, (3) two planes.
   In class (1) the machinery of Magick --- the instrument -
-- already exists.  Thus, I may wish to heal my own body,
increase my own energy; develop my own mental powers, or
inspire my own imagination.  Here the Exorcist and the Demon
are already connected, consciously or subconsciously, by an
excellent system of symbols.  The Will is furnished by
Nature with an apparatus adequately equipped to convey and
execute its orders.
   It is only necessary to inflame the Will to the proper
pitch and to issue its commands; they are instantly obeyed,
unless --- as in the case of organic disease --- the
apparatus is damaged beyond the art of Nature to repair.  It
may be necessary in such a case to assist the internal
"spirits" by the "purification" of medicines, the
"banishing" of diet, or some other extraneous means.
   But at least there is no need of any special device "ad
hoc" to effect contact between the Circle and the Triangle.
Operations of this class are therefore often successful,
even when the Magician has little or no technical knowledge
of Magick.  Almost any duffer can "pull himself together",
devote himself to study, break off a bad habit, or conquer a
cowardice.  This class of work, although the easiest, is yet
the most important; for it includes initiation itself in its
highest sense.  It extends to the Absolute in every
dimension; it involves the most intimate analysis, and the
most comprehensive synthesis.  In a sense, it is the sole
type of Magick either necessary or proper to the Adept; for
it includes both the attainment of the Knowledge and
Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel, and the Adventure
of the Abyss.
   The second class includes all operations by which the
Magician strives to impose his Will upon objects outside his
own control, but within that of such other wills as are
symbolised by means of {116} a system similar to his own.
That is, they can be compelled naturally by cognate
consciousness.
   For instance, one may wish to obtain the knowledge put
forth in this book.  Not knowing that such a book exists,
one might yet induce some one who knows of it to offer a
copy.  Thus one's operation would consist in inflaming one's
Will to possess the knowledge to the point of devoting one's
life to it, in expressing that will by seeking out people
who seem likely to know what is needed, and in imposing it
on them by exhibiting such enthusiastic earnestness that
they will tell the enquirer that this book will meet his
needs.
   Does this sound too simple?  Can this obvious common-
sense course be really that marvellous Magick that frightens
folk so?  Yes, even this triviality is one instance of how
Magick works.
   But the above practical programme may be a fiasco.  One
might then resort to Magick in the conventional sense of the
word, by constructing and charging a Pantacle appropriate to
the object; this Pantacle should then cause a strain in the
Astral Light such that the vibrations would compel some
alien consciousness to restore equilibrium by bringing the
book.
   Suppose a severer and more serious aim; suppose that I
wish to win a woman who dislikes me and loves somebody else.
In this case, not only her Will, but her lover's must be
overcome by my own.  I have no direct control of either.
But my Will is in touch with the woman's by means of our
minds; I have only to make my mind the master of hers by the
existing means of communication; her mind will then present
its recantation to her Will, her Will repeal its decision,
and her body submit to mine as the seal of her surrender.
   Here the Magical Link exists; only it is complex instead
of simple as in the First Class.
 There is opportunity for all kinds of error in the
transmission of the Will; misunderstanding may mar the
matter; a mood may make mischief; external events may
interfere; the lover may match me in Magick; the Operation
itself may offend nature in many ways; for instance, if
there is a subconscious incompatibility between myself and
the woman, I deceive myself into thinking {117} that I
desire her.  Such a flaw is enough to bring the whole
operation to naught, just as no effort of Will can make oil
mix with water.
   I may work "naturally" by wooing, of course.  But,
magically, I may attack her astrally so that her aura
becomes uneasy, responding no longer to her lover.  Unless
they diagnose the cause, a quarrel may result, and the
woman's bewildered and hungry Body of Light may turn in its
distress to that of the Magician who has mastered it.
   Take a third case of this class 2.  I wish to recover my
watch, snatched from me in a crowd.
   Here I have no direct means of control over the muscles
that could bring back my watch, or over the mind that moves
these muscles.  I am not even able to inform that mind of my
Will, for I do not know where it is.  But I know it to be a
mind fundamentally like my own, and I try to make a Magical
Link with it by advertising my loss in the hope of reaching
it, being careful to calm it by promising it immunity, and
to appeal to its own known motive by offering a reward.  I
also attempt to use the opposite formula; to reach it by
sending my "familiar spirits", the police, to hunt it, and
compel its obedience by threats.<<The ceremonial method
would be to transfer to the watch ---  linked naturally to
me by possession and use --- a thought calculated to terrify
the thief, and induce him to get rid of it at once.
Observing clairsentiently this effect, suggest relief and
reward as the result of restoring it.>>
   Again, a sorcerer might happen to possess an object
belonging magically to a rich man, such as a compromising
letter, which is really as much part of him as his liver; he
may then master the will of that man by intimidating his
mind.  His power to publish the letter is as effective as if
he could injure the man's body directly.
   These "natural" cases may be transposed into subtler
terms; for instance, one might master another man, even a
stranger, by sheer concentration of will, ceremonially or
otherwise wrought up to the requisite potential.  But in one
way or another that will must be {118} made to impinge on
the man; by the normal means of contact if possible, if not,
by attacking some sensitive spot in his subconscious
sensorium.  But the heaviest rod will not land the smallest
fish unless there be a line of some sort fixed firmly to
both.
   The Third Class is characterized by the absence of any
existing link between the Will of the Magician and that
controlling the object to be affected.  (The Second Class
may approximate to the Third when there is no possibility of
approaching the second mind by normal means, as sometimes
happens).
   This class of operations demands not only immense
knowledge of the technique of Magick combined with
tremendous vigour and skill, but a degree of Mystical
attainment which is exceedingly rare, and when found is
usually marked by an absolute apathy on the subject of any
attempt to achieve any Magick at all.  Suppose that I wish
to produce a thunderstorm.  This event is beyond my control
or that of any other man; it is as useless to work on their
minds as my own.  Nature is independent of, and indifferent
to, man's affairs.  A storm is caused by atmospheric
conditions on a scale so enormous that the united efforts of
all us Earth-vermin could scarcely disperse one cloud, even
if we could get at it.  How then can any Magician, he who is
above all things a knower of Nature, be so absurd as to
attempt to throw the Hammer of Thor?  Unless he be simply
insane, he must be initiated in a Truth which transcends the
apparent facts.  He must be aware that all nature is a
continuum, so that his mind and body are consubstantial with
the storm, are equally expressions of One Existence, all
alike of the self-same order of artifices whereby the
Absolute appreciates itself.  He must also have assimilated
the fact that the Quantity is just as much a form as
Quality; that as all things are modes of One Substance, so
their measures are modes of their relation.  Not only are
gold and lead mere letters, meaningless in themselves yet
appointed to spell the One Name; but the difference between
the bulk of a mountain and that of a mouse is no more than
one method of differentiating them, just as the letter "m"
is not bigger than the letter "i: in any real sense of the
word.<<Professor Rutherford thinks it not theoretically
impracticable to construct a detonator which could destroy
every atom of matter by releasing the energies of one, so
that the vibrations would excite the rest to disintegrate
explosively.>> {119}
   Our Magician, with this in his mind, will most probably
leave thunderstorms to stew in their own juice; but, should
he decide (after all) to enliven the afternoon, he will work
in the manner following.
   First, what are the elements necessary for his storms?
He must have certain stores of electrical force, and the
right kind of clouds to contain it.
   He must see that the force does not leak away to earth
quietly and slyly.
   He must arrange a stress so severe as to become at last
so intolerable that it will disrupt explosively.
   Now he, as a man, cannot pray to God to cause them, for
the Gods are but names for the forces of Nature themselves.
 But, "as a Mystic", he knows that all things are phantoms
of One Thing, and that they may be withdrawn therein to
reissue in other attire.  He knows that all things are in
himself, and that he is All-One with the All.  There is
therefore no theoretical difficulty about converting the
illusion of a clear sky into that of a tempest.  On the
other hand, he is aware, "as a Magician", that illusions are
governed by the laws of their nature.  He knows that twice
two is four, although both "two" and "four" are merely
properties pertaining to One.  He can only use the Mystical
identity of all things in a strictly scientific sense.  It
is true that his experience of clear skies and storms proves
that his nature contains elements cognate with both; for it
not, they could not affect him.  He is the Microcosm of his
own Macrocosm, whether or no either one or the other extend
beyond his knowledge of them.  He must therefore arouse in
himself those ideas which are clansmen of the Thunderstorm,
collect all available objects of the same nature for
talismans, and proceed to excite all these to the utmost by
a Magical ceremony; that is, by insisting on their godhead,
so that they flame within and without him, his ideas
vitalising the talismans.  There is thus a vivid vibration
of high potential in a certain group {121} of sympathetic
substances and forces; and this spreads as do the waves from
a stone thrown into a lake, widening and weakening; till the
disturbance is compensated.  Just as a handful of fanatics,
insane with one over-emphasised truth, may infect a whole
country for a time by inflaming that thought in their
neighbours, so the Magician creates a commotion by
disturbing the balance of power.  He transmits his
particular vibration as a radio operator does with his ray;
rate-relation determines exclusive selection.
   In practice, the Magician must "evoke the spirits of the
storm" by identifying himself with the ideas of which
atmospheric phenomena are the expressions as his humanity is
of him; thus achieved, he must impose his Will upon them by
virtue of the superiority of his intelligence and the
integration of his purpose to their undirected impulses and
uncomprehending interplay.
   All such Magick demands the utmost precision in practice.
It is true that the best rituals give us instructions in
selecting our vehicles of force.  In 777 we find
"correspondences" of many classes of being with the various
types of operation, so that we know what weapons, jewels,
figures, drugs, perfumes, names, etc. to employ in any
particular work.  But it has always been assumed that the
invoked force is intelligent and competent, that it will
direct itself as desired without further ado, by this method
of sympathetic vibrations.
   The necessity of timing the force has been ignored; and
so most operations, even when well performed as far as
invocation goes, are as harmless as igniting loose
gunpowder.
   But, even allowing that Will is sufficient to determine
the direction, and prevent the dispersion of the force, we
can hardly be sure that it will act on its object, unless
that object be properly prepared to receive it.  The Link
must be perfectly made.  The object must possess in itself a
sufficiency of stuff sympathetic to our work.  We cannot
make love to a brick, or set an oak to run errands.
   We see, then, that we can never affect anything outside
ourselves save only as it is also within us.  Whatever I do
to another, I do also to myself.  If I kill a man, I destroy
my own life at the same time.  That is the magical meaning
of the so-called {121} "Golden Rule", which should not be in
the imperative but in the indicative mood.  Every vibration
awakens all others of its particular pitch.
   There is thus some justification for the assumption of
previous writers on Magick that the Link is implicit, and
needs no special attention.  Yet, in practice, there is
nothing more certain than that one ought to confirm one's
will by all possible acts on all possible planes.  The
ceremony must not be confined to the formally magical rites.
We must neglect no means to our end, neither despising our
common sense, nor doubting our secret wisdom.
   When Frater I. A. was in danger of death in 1899 e.v.
Frater V. N. and FRATER PERDURABO did indeed invoke the
spirit Buer to visible manifestation that the might heal
their brother; but also one of them furnished the money to
send him to a climate less cruel than England's.  He is
alive to day<<P.S.  He died some months after this passage
was written: but he had been enabled to live and work for
nearly a quarter of a century longer than he would otherwise
have done.>>; who cares whether spirits or shekels wrought
that which these Magicians willed?
 Let the Magical Link be made strong!  It is "love under
will"; it affirms the identity of the Equation of the work;
it makes success Necessity.



                                  -------


{122}




                                 CHAPTER XVI

                                  "(Part I)"

                                 OF THE OATH


   The third operation in any magical ceremony is the oath
or proclamation.  The Magician, armed and ready, stands in
the centre of the Circle, and strikes once upon the bell as
if to call the attention of the Universe.  He then declares
"who he is", reciting his magical history by the
proclamation of the grades which he has attained, giving the
signs and words of those grades.<<This is not merely to
prove himself a person in authority.  It is to trace the
chain of causes that have let to the present position, so
that the operation is seen as karma.>>
   He then states the purpose of the ceremony, and proves
that it is necessary to perform it and to succeed in its
performance.  He then takes an oath before the Lord of the
Universe (not before the particular Lord whom he is
invoking) as if to call Him to witness to the act.  He
swears solemnly that he will perform it --- that nothing
shall prevent him from performing it --- that he will not
leave the operation until it is successfully performed ---
and once again he strikes upon the bell.
   Yet, having demonstrated himself in that position at once
infinitely lofty and infinitely unimportant, the instrument
of destiny, he balances this by the "Confession", in which
there is again an infinite exaltation harmonised with an
infinite humility.  He admits himself to be a weak human
being humbly aspiring to something higher; a creature of
circumstance utterly dependent --- even for the breath of
life --- upon a series of fortunate accidents.  {123} He
makes this confession prostrate<<Compare the remarks in a
previous chapter.  But this is a particular case.  We leave
its justification as a problem.>> before the altar in agony
and bloody sweat.  He trembles at the thought of the
operation which he has dared to undertake, saying, "Father,
if it be Thy Will, let this cup pass from me!  Nevertheless
not my will but Thine be done!"<<Of course this is for the
beginner.  As soon as it is assimilated as true, he will
say: "My will which is thine be done!"  And ultimately no
more distinguish "mine" from "thine".  A sympathetic change
of gesture will accompany the mental change.>>
   The dread answer comes that It Must Be, and this answer
so fortifies him with holy zeal that it will seem to him as
if he were raised by divine hands from that prostrate
position; with a thrill of holy exaltation he renews
joyfully the Oath, feeling himself once again no longer the
man but the Magician, yet not merely the Magician, but the
chosen and appointed person to accomplish a task which,
however apparently unimportant, is yet an integral part of
universal destiny, so that if it were not accomplished the
Kingdom of Heaven would be burst in pieces.
   He is now ready to commence the invocations.  He
consequently pauses to cast a last glance around the Temple
to assure himself of the perfect readiness of all things
necessary, and to light the incense.

                            ---------

   The Oath is the foundation of all Work in Magick, as it
is an affirmation of the Will.  An Oath binds the Magician
for ever.  In Part II of Book 4 something has already been
said on this subject; but its importance deserves some
further elaboration.  Thus, should one, loving a woman, make
a spell to compel her embraces, and tiring of her a little
later, evoke Zazel to kill her; he will find that the
implications of his former Oath conflict with those proper
to invoke the Unity of the Godhead of Saturn.  Zazel will
refuse to obey him in the case of the woman whom he has
sworn that he loves.  To this some may object that, since
all acts are magical, every man who loves a woman implicitly
takes an {124} Oath of love, and therefore would never be
able to murder her later, as we find to be the not uncommon
case.  The explanation is as follows.  It is perfectly true
that when Bill Sykes desires to possess Nancy, he does in
fact evoke a spirit of the nature of Venus, constraining him
by his Oath of Love (and by his magical power as a man) to
bring him the girl.  So also, when he wants to kill her, he
evokes a Martial or Saturnian spirit, with an Oath of hate.
But these are not pure planetary spirits, moving in well-
defined spheres by rigidly righteous laws.  They are gross
concretions of confused impulses, "incapable of
understanding the nature of an oath".  They are also such
that the idea of murder is nowise offensive to the Spirit of
Love.
   It is indeed the criterion of spiritual "caste" that
conflicting elements should not coexist in the same
consciousness.  The psalm-singing Puritan who persecutes
publicans, and secretly soaks himself in fire-water; the
bewhiskered philanthropist in broadcloth who swindles his
customers and sweats his employees: these men must not be
regarded as single-minded scoundrels, whose use of religion
and respectability to cloke their villainies is a deliberate
disguise dictated by their criminal cunning.  Far from it,
they are only too sincere in their "virtues"; their terror
of death and of supernatural vengeance is genuine; it
proceeds from a section of themselves which is in
irreconcilable conflict with their rascality.  Neither side
can conciliate, suppress, or ignore the other; yet each is
so craven as to endure its enemy's presence.  Such men are
therefore without pure principles; they excuse themselves
for every dirty trick that turns to their apparent
advantage.
   The first step of the Aspirant toward the Gate of
Initiation tells him that purity --- unity of purpose --- is
essential above all else.  "Do what thou Wilt" strikes on
him, a ray of fierce white flame consuming all that is not
utterly God.  Very soon he is aware that he cannot
consciously contradict himself.  He develops a subtle sense
which warns him that two trains of thought which he had
never conceived as connected are incompatible.  Yet deeper
drives "Do what thou wilt"; subconscious oppositions are
evoked to visible appearance.  The secret sanctuaries of the
soul are cleansed.  "Do What thou Wilt" purges his every
part.  He has become One, one only.  His Will is
consequently released from {125} the interference of
internal opposition, and he is a Master of Magick.  But for
that very reason he is now utterly impotent to achieve
anything that is not in absolute accordance with his
Original Oath, with his True Will, by virtue whereof he
incarnated as a man.  With Bill Sykes love and murder are
not mutually exclusive, as they are with King Arthur.  The
higher the type of man, the more sensitive he becomes; so
that the noblest love divines intuitively when a careless
word or gesture may wound, and, vigilant, shuns them as
being of the family of murder.  In Magick, likewise, the
Adept who is sworn to attain to the Knowledge and
Conversation of his Holy Guardian Angel may in his grosser
days have been expert as a Healer, to find that he is now
incapable of any such work.  He will probably be puzzled,
and wonder whether he has lost all his power.  Yet the cause
may be no more than that the Wisdom of his Angel depreciates
the interference of ignorant kindliness with diseases which
may have been sent to the sufferer for a purpose profoundly
important to his welfare.
 In the case of THE MASTER THERION, he had originally the
capacity for all classes of Orgia.  In the beginning, He
cured the sick, bewitched the obstinate, allured the
seductive, routed the aggressive, made himself invisible,
and generally behaved like a Young-Man-About-town on every
possible plane.  He would afflict one vampire with a Sending
of Cats, and appoint another his private Enchantress,
neither aware of any moral oxymoron, nor hampered by the
implicit incongruity of his oaths.
   But as He advanced in Adeptship, this coltishness found
its mouth bitted; as soon as He took serious Oaths and was
admitted to the Order which we name not, those Oaths
prevented him using His powers as playthings.  Trifling
operations, such as He once could do with a turn of the
wrist, became impossible to the most persistent endeavour.
It was many years before He understood the cause of this.
But little by little He became so absorbed in the Work of
His true Will that it no longer occurred to Him to indulge
in capricious amusements.
   Yet even at this hour, though He be verily a Magus of
A.'. A.'., though His Word be the Word of the Aeon, though
He be the Beast 666, the Lord of the Scarlet Woman "in whom
is all power {126} given", there are still certain Orgia
beyond Him to perform, because to do so would be to affirm
what He hath denied in those Oaths by whose virtue He is
That He is.  This is the case, even when the spirit of such
Orgia is fully consonant with His Will.  The literal sense
of His original Oath insists that it shall be respected.
   The case offers two instances of this principle.  FRATER
PERDURABO specifically swore that he would renounce His
personal possessions to the last penny; also that He would
allow no human affection to hinder Him.  These terms were
accepted; He was granted infinitely more than He had
imagined possible to an incarnated Man.  On the other hand,
the price offered by Him was exacted as strictly as if it
had been stipulated by Shylock.  Every treasure that he had
on earth was taken away, and that, usually, in so brutal or
cruel a manner as to make the loss itself the least part of
the pang.  Every human affection that He had in His heart --
- and that heart aches for Love as few hearts can ever
conceive --- was torn out and trampled with such infernal
ingenuity in intensifying torture that His endurance is
beyond belief.  Inexplicable are the atrocities which
accompanied every step in His Initiation!  Death dragged
away His children with slow savagery; the women He loved
drank themselves into delirium and dementia before His eyes,
or repaid His passionate devotion with toad-cold treachery
at the moment when long years of loyalty had tempted Him to
trust them.  His friend, that bore the bag, stole that which
was put therein, and betrayed his Master as thoroughly as he
was able.  At the first distant rumour that the Pharisees
were out, his disciples "all forsook Him and fled".  His
mother nailed Him with her own hands to the cross, and
reviled Him as nine years He hung thereupon.
 Now, having endured to the end, being Master of Magick, He
is mighty to Work His true Will; which Will is, to establish
on Earth His Word, the Law of Thelema.  He hath none other
Will than this; so all that He doth is unto this end.  All
His Orgia bear fruit; what was the work of a month when He
was a full Major Adept is to day wrought in a few minutes by
the Words of Will, uttered with the right vibrations into
the prepared Ear.  {127}
 But neither by the natural use of His abilities, though
they have made Him famous through the whole world, nor by
the utmost might of his Magick, is He able to acquire
material wealth beyond the minimum necessary to keep Him
alive and at work.  It is in vain that He protests that not
He but the Work is in need of money; He is barred by the
strict letter of His Oath to give all that He hath for His
magical Attainment.
   Yet more awful is the doom that He hath invoked upon
Himself in renouncing His right as a man to enjoy the Love
of those whom He loves with passion so selfless, so pure,
and so intense in return for the power so to love Mankind
that He be chosen to utter the Word of the Aeon for their
sake, His reward universal abhorrence, bodily torment,
mental despair, and moral paralysis.
   Yet He, who hath power over Death, with breath to call
back health, with a touch to beckon life, He must watch His
own child waste away month by month, aware that His Art may
not anywise avail, who hath sold the signet ring of his
personal profit to buy him a plain gold band for the felon
finger of his bride, that worn widow, the World!


                           ----------


{128}






                            CHAPTER XV


                                 I

                         OF THE INVOCATION


   In the  straightforward or "Protestant" system of Magick
there is very little to add to what has already been said.
The Magician addresses a direct petition to the Being
invoked.  But the secret of success in invocation has not
hitherto been disclosed.  It is an exceedingly simple one.
It is practically of no importance whatever that the
invocation should be "right".  There are a thousand
different ways of compassing the end proposed, so far as
external things are concerned.  The whole secret may be
summarised in these four words: "Enflame thyself in
praying."<<This is Qabalistically expressed in the old
Formula: Domine noster, audi tuo servo! kyrie Christe! O
Christe!>>
   The mind must be exalted until it loses consciousness of
self.  The Magician must be carried forward blindly by a
force which, though in him and of him, is by no means that
which he in his normal state of consciousness calls I.  Just
as the poet, the lover, the artist, is carried out of
himself in a creative frenzy, so must it be for the
Magician.
   It is impossible to lay down rules for the obtaining of
this special stimulus.  To one the mystery of the whole
ceremony may appeal; another may be moved by the strangeness
of the words, even by the fact that the "barbarous names"
are unintelligible to him.  Some times in the course of a
ceremony the true meaning of some barbarous name that has
hitherto baffled his analysis may flash upon him, luminous
and splendid, so that he is caught up unto {129} orgasm.
The smell of a particular incense may excite him
effectively, or perhaps the physical ecstasy of the magick
dance.
   Every Magician must compose his ceremony in such a manner
as to produce a dramatic cilmax.  At the moment when the
excitement becomes ungovernable, when then the whole
conscious being of the Magician undergoes a spiritual spasm,
at that moment must he utter the supreme adjuration.
 One very effective method is to stop short, by a supreme
effort of will, again and again, on the very brink of that
spasm, until a time arrives when the idea of exercising that
will fails to occur<<This forgetfulness must be complete; it
is fatal to try to "let oneself go" consciously.>>.
Inhibition is no longer possible or even thinkable, and the
whole being of the Magician, no minutest atom saying nay, is
irresistibly flung forth.  In blinding light, amid the roar
of ten thousand thunders, the Union of God and man is
consummated.
   If the Magician is still seen standing in the Circle,
quietly pursuing his invocations, it is that all the
conscious part of him has become detached from the true ego
which lies behind that normal consciousness.  But the circle
is wholly filled with that divine essence; all else is but
an accident and an illusion.
   The subsequent invocations, the gradual development and
materialization of the force, require no effort.  It is one
great mistake of the beginner to concentrate his force upon
the actual stated purpose of the ceremony.  This mistake is
the most frequent cause of failures in invocation.
   A corollary of this Theorem is that the Magician soon
discards evocation almost altogether --- only rare
circumstances demand any action what ever on the material
plane.  The Magician devotes himself entirely to the
invocation of a god; and as soon as his balance approaches
perfection he ceases to invoke any partial god; only that
god vertically above him is in his path.  And so a man who
perhaps took up Magick merely with the idea of acquiring
knowledge, love, or wealth, finds himself irrevocably
committed to the performance of "The Great Work."  {130}
   It will now be apparent that there is no distinction
between magick and meditation except of the most arbitrary
and accidental kind.<<There is the general metaphysical
antithesis that Magick is the Art of the Will-to-Live,
Mysticism of the Will-to-Die; but --- "Truth comes bubbling
to my brim; Life and Death are one to Him!".>>

                              II

   Beside these open methods thee are also a number of
mental methods of Invocation, of which we may give three.
   The first method concerns the so-called astral body.  The
Magician should practise the formation of this body as
recommended in Liber O, and learn to rise on the planes
according to the instruction given in the same book, though
limiting his "rising" to the particular symbol whose God he
wishes to invoke.
   The second is to recite a mantra suitable to the God.
   The third is the assumption of the form of the God --- by
transmuting the astral body into His shape.  This last
method is really essential to all proper invocation, and
cannot be too sedulously practised.
   There are many other devices to aid invocation, so many
that it is impossible to enumerate them; and the Magician
will be wise to busy himself in inventing new ones.
   We will give one example.
 Suppose the Supreme Invocation to consist of 20 to 30
barbarous names, let him imagine these names to occupy
sections of a vertical column, each double the length of the
preceding one; and let him imagine that his consciousness
ascends the column with each name.  The mere multiplication
will then produce a feeling of awe and bewilderment which is
the proper forerunner of exstasy.
   In the essay "Energized Enthusiasm" in No. IX, Vol. I of
the Equinox<<The earliest and truest Christians used what is
in all essentials this method.  See "Fragments of a Faith
Forgotten" by G.R.S.Mead, Esq. B. A., pp. 80-81.
   There is a real connexion between what the vulgar call
blasphemy and  what they call immorality, in the fact that
the Christian legend is an echo of a Phallic rite.  There is
also a true and positive connexion between the Creative
force of the Macrocosm, and that of the Microcosm.  For this
reason the latter must be made a pure and consecrated as the
former.  The puzzle for most people is how to do this.  The
study of Nature is the Key to that Gate.>> is given a
concise account of one of the classical methods of arousing
Kundalini.  This essay should be studied with care and
determination.

{131}


                              -------------


{132}






                               CHAPTER XVI

                               ("Part II")

                       OF THE CHARGE TO THE SPIRIT
                        WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF THE
               CONSTRAINTS AND CURSES OCCASIONALLY NECESSARY


                                    I

   On the appearance of the spirit, or the manifestation of
the force in the talisman which is being consecrated, it is
necessary to bind it by an Oath or Charge.  A spirit should
be made to lay its hand visibly on the weapon by whose might
it has been evoked, and to "swear obedience and faith to Him
that liveth and triumpheth, that regneth above him in His
palaces as the Balance of Righteousness and Truth" by the
names used in the evocation.
   It is then only necessary to formulate the Oath or Charge
in language harmonious with the previously announced purpose
of the operation.
   The precaution indicated is not to let oneself sink into
one's humanity while the weapon is extended beyond the
Circle.  Were the force to flow from it to you instead of
from you to it, you would be infallibly blasted, or, at the
least, become the slave of the spirit.
   At no moment is it more important that the Divine Force
should not only fill, but radiate from, the aura of the
Magician.

                                II

   Occasionally it may happen that the spirit is
recalcitrant, and refuses to appear.
   Let the Magician consider the cause of such disobedience!
{133}
   It may be that the place or time is wrong.  One cannot
easily evoke water-spirits in the Sahara, or salamanders in
the English Lake District.  Hismael will not readily appear
when Jupiter is below the horizon.<<It is not possible in
this elementary treatise to explain the exact nature of the
connexion between the rays of the actual planet called
Jupiter and the Jupiterian elements which exist in various
degrees in terrestrial objects.>>  In order to counteract a
natural deficiency of this sort, one would have to supply a
sufficient quantity of the proper kind of material.  One
cannot make bricks without straw.
   With regard to invocations of the Gods, such
considerations do not apply.  The Gods are beyond most
material conditions.  It is necessary to fill the "heart"
and "mind" with the proper basis for manifestation.  The
higher the nature of the God, the more true this is.  The
Holy Guardian Angel has always the necessary basis.  His
manifestation depends solely on the readiness of the
Aspirant, and all magical ceremonies used in that invocation
are merely intended to prepare that Aspirant; not in any way
to attract or influence Him.  It is His constant and eternal
Will<<Since this Knowledge and Conversation is not
universal, it seems at first as if an omnipotent will were
being baulked.  But His Will and your will together make up
that one will, because you and He are one.  That one will is
therefore divided against itself, so long as your will fails
to aspire steadfastly.
   Also, His will cannot constrain yours.  He is so much one
with you that even your will to separate is His will.  He is
so certain of you that He delights in your perturbation and
coquetry no less than in your surrender.  These relations
are fully explained in Liber LXV.  See also Liber Aleph
CXI.>> to become one with the Aspirant, and the moment the
conditions of the latter make it possible, That Bridal is
consummated.

                               III

   The obstinacy of a spirit (or the inertial of a talisman)
usually implies a defect in invocation.  The spirit cannot
resist even for a moment the constraint of his Intelligence,
when that Intelligence is working in accordance with the
Will of the Angel, Archangel {134} and God above him.  It is
therefore better to repeat the Invocations than to proceed
at once to curses.
   The Magician should also consider<<Of course this should
have been done in preparing the Ritual.  But he renews this
consideration from the new standpoint attained by the
invocation.>> whether the evocation be in truth a necessary
part of the Karma of the Universe, as he has stated in his
own Oath (See Cap. XVI, I).  For if this be a delusion,
success is impossible.  It will then be best to go back to
the beginning, and recapitulate with greater intensity and
power of analysis the Oath and the Invocations.  And this
may be done thrice.
   But if this be satisfactorily accomplished, and the
spirit be yet disobedient, the implication is that some
hostile force is at work to hinder the operation.  It will
then become advisable to discover the nature of that force,
and to attack and destroy it.  This makes the ceremony more
useful than ever to the Magician, who may thereby be led to
unveil a black magical gang whose existence he had not
hitherto suspected.
  His need to check the vampiring of a lady in Paris by a
sorceress once led FRATER PERDURABO to the discovery of a
very powerful body of black magicians, which whom he was
obliged to war for nearly 10 years before their ruin was
complete and irremediable as it now is.
   Such a discovery will not necessarily impede the
ceremony.  A general curse may be pronounced against the
forces hindering the operation (for "ex hypothesi" no divine
force can be interfering) and having thus temporarily
dislodged them --- for the power of the God invoked will
suffice for this purpose --- one may proceed with a certain
asperity to conjure the spirit, for that he has done ill to
bend before the conjurations of the Black Brothers.
 Indeed, some demons are of a nature such that they only
understand curses, are not amenable to courteous command: --
-
                                          "a slave
       Whom stripes may move, not kindness."
   Finally, as a last resource, one may burn the Sigil of
the {135} Spirit in a black box with stinking substances,
all having been properly prepared beforehand, and the
magical links properly made, so that he is really tortured
by the Operation.<<The precise meaning of these phrases is
at first sight obscure.  The spirit is merely a recalcitrant
part of one's own organism.  To evoke him is therefore to
become conscious of some part of one's own character; to
command and constrain him is to being that part into
subjection.  This is best understood by the analogy of
teaching oneself some mental-physical accomplishment (e.g.
billiards), by persistent and patient study and practice,
which often involves considerable pain as well as trouble.>>
   This is a rare event, however.  Only once in the whole of
his magical career was FRATER PERDURABO driven to so harsh a
measure.

                                IV

   In this connexion, beware of too ready a compliance on
the part of the spirit.  If some Black Lodge has got wind of
your operation, it may send the spirit, full of hypocritical
submission, to destroy you.  Such a spirit will probably
pronounce the oath amiss, or in some way seek to avoid his
obligations.
   It is a dangerous trick, though, for the Black Lodge to
play; for if the spirit come properly under your control, it
will be forced to disclose the transaction, and the current
will return to the Black Lodge with fulminating force.  The
liars will be in the power of their own lie; their own
slaves will rise up and put them into bondage.  The wicked
fall into the pit that they themselves digged.
  And so perish all the King's enemies!

                              V

   The charge to the spirit is usually embodied, except in
works of pure evocation, which after all are comparatively
rare, in some kind of talisman.  In a certain sense, the
talisman is the Charge expressed in hieroglyphics.  Yet,
every object soever is a talisman, for the definition of a
talisman is: something upon which an act of will (that is,
of Magick) has been performed in order to fit it for a
purpose.  Repeated acts of will in respect of {136} any
object consecrate it without further ado.  One knows what
miracles can be done with one's favourite mashie!  One has
used the mashie again and again, one's love for it growing
in proportion to one's success with it, and that success
again made more certain and complete by the effect of this
"love under will", which one bestows upon it by using it.
   It is, of course, very important to keep such an abject
away from the contact of the profane.  It is instinctive not
to let another person use one's fishing rod or one's gun.
It is not that they could do any harm in a material sense.
It is the feeling that one's use of these things has
consecrated them to one's self.
 Of course, the outstanding example of all such talismans is
the wife.  A wife may be defined as an object specially
prepared for taking the stamp of one's creative will.  This
is an example of a very complicated magical operation,
extending over centuries.  But, theoretically, it is just an
ordinary case of talismanic magick.  It is for this reason
that so much trouble has been taken to prevent a wife having
contact with the profane; or, at least, to try to prevent
her.
   Readers of the Bible will remember that Absalom publicly
adopted David's wives and concubines on the roof of the
palace, in order to signify that he had succeeded in
breaking his father's magical power.
   Now, there are a great many talismans in this world which
are being left lying about in a most reprehensibly careless
manner.  Such are the objects of popular adoration, as
ikons, and idols.  But, it is actually true that a great
deal of real magical Force is locked up in such things;
consequently, by destroying these sacred symbols, you can
overcome magically the people who adore them.
   It is not at all irrational to fight for one's flag,
provided that the flag is an object which really means
something to somebody.  Similarly, with the most widely
spread and most devotedly worshipped talisman of all,
money, you can evidently break the magical will of a
worshipper of money by taking his money away from him, or by
destroying its value in some way or another.  But, in the
case of money, general experience tells us that there is
very little of it lying about loose.  In this case, above
all, {137} people have recognised its talismanic virtue,
that is to say, its power as an instrument of the will.
   But with many ikons and images, it is easy to steal their
virtue.  This can be done sometimes on a tremendous scale,
as, for example, when all the images of Isis and Horus, or
similar mother-child combinations, were appropriated
wholesale by the Christians.  The miracle is, however, of a
somewhat dangerous type, as in this case, where
enlightenment has come through the researches of
archaeologists.  It has been shown that the so-called images
of Mary and Jesus are really nothing but imitations of those
of Isis and Horus.  Honesty is the best policy in Magick as
in other lines of life.


                           ---------


{138}





                          CHAPTER XVII

                     OF THE LICENSE TO DEPART


   After a ceremony has reached its climax, anti-climax must
inevitably follow.  But if the ceremony has been successful
this anti-climax is merely formal.  The Magician should rest
permanently on the higher plain to which he has
aspired.<<The rock-climber who relaxes on the face of the
precipice falls to earth; but once he has reached a safe
ledge he may sit down.>>  The whole force of the operation
should be absorbed; but there is almost certain to be a
residuum, since no operation is perfect: and (even if it
were so) there would be a number of things, sympathetic to
the operation, attracted to the Circle.  These must be duly
dispersed, or they will degenerate and become evil.  It is
always easy to do this where invocations are concerned; the
mere removal of the strain imposed by the will of the
magician will restore things to their normal aspects, in
accordance with the great law of inertia.  In a badly-
managed evocation, however, this does not always obtain; the
spirit may refuse to be controlled, and may refuse to depart
--- even after having sworn obedience.  In such a case
extreme danger may arise.
   In the ordinary way, the Magician dismisses the spirit
with these words: "And now I say unto thee, depart in peace
unto thine habitations and abodes --- and may the blessing
of the Highest be upon thee in the name of (here mention the
divine name suitable to the operation, or a Name appropriate
to redeem that spirit); and let there be peace between thee
and me; and be thou very ready to come, whensoever thou are
invoked and called!"<<It is usual to add "either by a word,
or by a will, or by this mighty Conjuration of Magick
Art.">>  {139}
   Should he fail to disappear immediately, it is a sign
that there is something very wrong.  The Magician should
immediately reconsecrate the Circle with the utmost care.
He should then repeat the dismissal; and if this does not
suffice, he should then perform the banishing ritual
suitable to the nature of the spirit and, if necessary, add
conjurations to the same effect.  In these circumstances, or
if anything else suspicious should occur, he should not be
content with the apparent disappearance of the spirit, who
might easily make himself invisible and lie in ambush to do
the Magician a mischief when he stepped out of the Circle --
- or even months afterwards.
   Any symbol which has once definitely entered your
environment with your own consent is extremely dangerous;
unless under absolute control.  A man's friends are more
capable of working him harm than are strangers; and his
greatest danger lies in his own habits.
   Of course it is the very condition of progress to build
up ideas into the subconscious.  The necessity of selection
should therefore be obvious.
   True, there comes a time when all elements soever must be
thus assimilated.  Samadhi is, by definition, that very
process.  But, from the point of view of the young magician,
there is a right way --- strait and difficult --- of
performing all this.  One cannot too frequently repeat that
what is lawful and proper to one Path is alien to another.
  Immediately after the License to Depart, and the general
closing up of the work, it is necessary that the Magician
should sit down and write up his magical record.  However
much he may have been tired<<He ought to be refreshed, more
than after a full night's deep sleep.  This forms one test
of his skill.>> by the ceremony, he ought to force himself
to do this until it becomes a habit.  Verily, it is better
to fail in the magical ceremony than to fail in writing down
an accurate record of it.  One need not doubt the propriety
of this remark.  Even if one is eaten alive by Malkah be-
Tarshishim ve-Ruachoth ha-Schehalim, it does not matter very
much, for it is over so very quickly.  But the record of the
transactions is {140} otherwise important.  Nobody cares
about Duncan having been murdered by Macbeth.  It is only
one of a number of similar murders.  But Shakespeare's
account of the incident is a unique treasure of mankind.
And, apart from the question of the value to others, there
is that of the value to the magician himself.  The record of
the magician is his best asset.
   It is as foolish to do Magick without method, as if it
were anything else.  To do Magick without keeping a record
is like trying to run a business without book-keeping.
There are a great many people who quite misunderstand the
nature of Magick.  They have an idea that it is something
vague and unreal, instead of being, as it is, a direct means
of coming into contact with reality.  It is these people who
pay themselves with phrases, who are always using long words
with no definite connotation, who plaster themselves with
pompous titles and decorations which mean nothing whatever.
With such people we have nothing to do.  But to those who
seek reality the Key of Magick is offered, and they are
hereby warned that the key to the treasure-house is no good
without the combination; and the combination is the magical
record.
   From one point of view, magical progress actually
consists in deciphering one's own record.<<As one is a Star
in the Body of Nuith, every successive incarnation is a
Veil, and the acquisition of the Magical Memory a gradual
Unveiling of that Star, of that God.>>  For this reason it
is the most important thing to do, on strictly magical
grounds.  But apart from this, it is absolutely essential
that the record should be clear, full and concise, because
it is only by such a record that your teacher can judge how
it is best to help you.  Your magical teacher has something
else to do besides running around after you all the time,
and the most important of all his functions is that of
auditor.  Now, if you call in an auditor to investigate a
business, and when he asks for the books you tell him that
you have not thought it worth while to keep any, you need
not be surprised if he thinks you every kind of an ass.
   It is --- at least, it was --- perfectly incredible to
THE MASTER THERION that people who exhibit ordinary common
sense in {141} the other affairs of life should lose it
completely when they tackle Magick.  It goes far to justify
the belief of the semi-educated that Magick is rather a
crazy affair after all.  However, there are none of these
half-baked lunatics connected with the A.'. A.'., because
the necessity for hard work, for passing examinations at
stated intervals, and for keeping an intelligible account of
what they are doing, frightens away the unintelligent, idle
and hysterical.
   There are numerous models of magical and mystical records
to be found in the various numbers of the "Equinox", and the
student will have no difficulty in acquiring the necessary
technique, if he be diligent in practice.


                            ---------


{142}






                           CHAPTER XVIII

              OF CLAIRVOYANCE AND THE BODY OF LIGHT
                   ITS POWER AND ITS DEVELOPMENT
                    ALSO CONCERNING DIVINATION

                                 I

 Within the human body is another body of approximately the
same size and shape;<<i.e. as a general rule.  It can be
altered very greatly in these respects.>> but made of a
subtler and less illusory material.  It is of course not
"real"; but then no more is the other body!  Before treating
of clairvoyance one must discuss briefly this question of
reality, for misapprehension on the subject has given rise
to endless trouble.
   There is the story of the American in the train who saw
another American carrying a basket of unusual shape.  His
curiosity mastered him, and he leant across and said:  "Say,
stranger, what you got in that bag?"  The other, lantern-
jawed and taciturn, replied: "mongoose".  The first man was
rather baffled, as he had never heard of a mongoose.  After
a pause he pursued, at the risk of a rebuff: "But say, what
is a Mongoose?"  "Mongoose eats snakes", replied the other.
This was another poser, but he pursued: "What in hell do you
want a Mongoose for?"  "Well, you see", said the second man
(in a confidential whisper) "my brother sees snakes".  The
first man was more puzzled than ever; but after a long
think, he continued rather pathetically: "But say, them
ain't real snakes".  "Sure", said the man with the basket,
"but this Mongoose ain't real either".
   This is a perfect parable of Magick.  There is no such
thing {143} as truth in the perceptible universe; every idea
when analysed is found to contain a contradiction.  It is
quite useless (except as a temporary expedient) to set up
one class of ideas against another as being "more real".
The advance of man towards God is not necessarily an advance
towards truth.  All philosophical systems have crumbled.
But each class of ideas possesses true relations within
itself.  It is possible, with Berkeley,<<The real Berkeley
did nothing of the sort: the reference here is to an
imaginary animal invented by Dr. Johnson out of sturdy
British ignorance.>> to deny the existence of water and of
wood; but, for all that, wood floats on water.  The Magician
becomes identical with the immortal Osiris, yet the Magician
dies.  In this dilemma the facts must be restated.  One
should preferably say that the Magician becomes conscious of
that part of himself which he calls the immortal Osiris; and
that Part does not "die".
   Now this interior body of the Magician, of which we spoke
at the beginning of this chapter, does exist, and can exert
certain powers which his natural body cannot do.  It can,
for example, pass through "matter", and it can move freely
in every direction through space.  But this is because
"matter", in the sense in which we commonly use the word, is
on another plane<<We do not call electrical resistance, or
economic laws, unreal, on the ground that they are not
directly perceived by the senses.  Our magical doctrine is
universally accepted by sceptics --- only they wish to make
Magick itself an exception!>>.
   Now this fine body perceives a universe which we do not
ordinarily perceive.  It does not necessarily perceive the
universe which we do normally perceive, so although in this
body I can pass through the roof, it does not follow that I
shall be able to tell what the weather is like.  I might do
so, or I might not: but if I could not, it would not prove
that I was deceiving myself in supposing that I had passed
through the roof.  This body, which is called by various
authors the Astral double, body of Light, body of fire, body
of desire, fine body, scin-laeca and numberless other names
is naturally fitted to perceive objects of its own class ...
in particular, the phantoms of the astral plane. {144}
   There is some sort of vague and indeterminate relation
between the Astrals and the Materials; and it is possible,
with great experience, to deduce facts about material things
from the astral aspect which they present to the eyes of the
Body of Light.<<This is because there is a certain necessary
correspondence between planes; as in the case of an Anglo-
Indian's liver and this temper.  The relation appears "vague
and indeterminate" only in so far as one happens to be
ignorant of the laws which state the case.  The situation is
analogous to that of the chemist before the discovery of the
law of "Combining Weights", etc.>>  This astral plane is so
varied and so changeable that several clairvoyants looking
at the same thing might give totally different accounts of
what they saw; yet they might each make correct deductions.
In looking at a man the first clairvoyant might say: "The
lines of force are all drooping"; the second: "It seems all
dirty and spotty"; a third; "The Aura looks very ragged."
Yet all might agree in deducing that the man was in ill-
health.  In any case all such deductions are rather
unreliable.  One must be a highly skilled man before one can
trust one's vision.  A great many people think that they are
extremely good at the business, when in fact they have only
made some occasional shrewd guesses (which they naturally
remember) in the course of hundreds of forgotten failures.
   The only way to test clairvoyance is to keep a careful
record of every experiment made.  For example, FRATER O. M.
once gave a clairvoyant a waistcoat to psychometrize.  He
made 56 statements about the owner of the waistcoat; of
these 4 were notably right; 17, though correct, were of that
class of statement which is true of almost everybody.  The
remainder were wrong.  It was concluded from this that he
showed no evidence of any special power.  In fact, his
bodily eyes, --- if he could discern Tailoring --- would
have served him better, for he thought the owner of the vest
was a corn-chandler, instead of an earl, as he is.
   The Magician can hardly take too much trouble to develop
this power in himself.  It is extremely useful to him in
guarding himself against attack; in obtaining warnings, in
judging character, and especially in watching the process of
his Ceremonies.  {145}
   There are a great many ways of acquiring the power.  Gaze
into a crystal, or into a pool of ink in the palm of the
hand, or into a mirror, or into a teacup.  Just as with a
microscope the expert operator keeps both eyes open, though
seeing only through the one at the eye-piece of the
instrument, so the natural eyes, ceasing to give any message
to the brain, the attention is withdrawn from them, and the
man begins to see through the Astral eyes.
   These methods appear to The MASTER THERION to be
unsatisfactory.  Very often they do not work at all.  It is
difficult to teach a person to use these methods; and, worst
of all, they are purely passive!  You can see only what is
shewn you, and you are probably shewn things perfectly
pointless and irrelevant.
 The proper method is as follows: --- Develop the body of
Light until it is just as real to you as your other body,
teach it to travel to any desired symbol, and enable it to
perform all necessary Rites and Invocations.  In short,
educate it.  Ultimately, the relation of that body with your
own must be exceedingly intimate; but before this
harmonizing takes place, you should begin by a careful
differentiation.  The first thing to do, therefore, is to
get the body outside your own.  To avoid muddling the two,
you begin by imagining a shape resembling yourself standing
in front of you.  Do not say: "Oh, it's only imagination!"
The time to test that is later on, when you have secured a
fairly clear mental image of such a body.  Try to imagine
how your own body would look if you were standing in its
place; try to transfer your consciousness to the Body of
Light.  Your own body has its eyes shut.  Use the eyes of
the Body of Light to describe the objects in the room behind
you.  Don't say. "It's only an effort of subconscious
memory" ... the time to test that is later on.
   As soon as you feel more or less at home in the fine
body, let it rise in the air.  Keep on feeling the sense of
rising; keep on looking about you as you rise until you see
landscapes or beings of the astral plane.  Such have a
quality all their own.  They are not like material things --
- they are not like mental pictures --- they seem to lie
between the two.
   After some practice has made you adept, so that in the
course {146} of any hour's journey you can reckon on having
a fairly eventful time, turn your attention to reaching a
definite place on the astral plane; invoke Mercury, for
example, and examine carefully your record of the resulting
vision --- discover whether the symbols which you have seen
correspond with the conventional symbols of Mercury.
   This testing of the spirits is the most important branch
of the whole tree of Magick.  Without it, one is lost in the
jungle of delusion.  Every spirit, up to God himself, is
ready to deceive you if possible, to make himself out more
important than he is; in short to lay in wait for your soul
in 333 separate ways.  Remember that after all the highest
of all the Gods is only the Magus,<<See Liber 418, 3rd
Aethyr.>> Mayan, the greatest of all the devils.
   You may also try "rising on the planes".<<See Infra and
Appendix.>>  With a little practice, especially if you have
a good Guru, you ought to be able to slip in and out of your
astral body as easily as you slip in and out of a dressing-
gown.  It will then no longer be so necessary for your
astral body to be sent far off; without moving an inch you
will be able to "turn on" its eyes and ears --- as simply as
the man with the microscope (mentioned above) can transfer
his complete attention from one eye to the other.
 Now, however unsuccessful your getting out the body may
apparently have been, it is most necessary to use every
effort to bring it properly back.  Make the Body of Light
coincide in space with the physical body, assume the God-
Form, and vibrate the name of Harpocrates with the utmost
energy; then recover unity of consciousness.  If you fail to
do this properly you may find yourself in serious trouble.
Your Body of Light may wander away uncontrolled, and be
attacked and obsessed.  You will become aware of this
through the occurrence of headache, bad dreams, or even more
serious signs such as hysteria, fainting fits, possibly
madness or paralysis.  Even the worst of these attacks will
probably wear off, but it may leave you permanently damaged
to a greater or less extent.  {147}
   A great majority of "spiritualists", "occultists",
"Toshosophists", are pitiable examples of repeated losses
from this cause.
   The emotional type of religionist also suffers in this
way.  Devotion projects the fine body, which is seized and
vampirized by the demon masquerading as "Christ" or "Mary",
or whoever may be the object of worship.  Complete absence
of all power to concentrate thought, to follow an argument,
to formulate a Will, to hold fast to an opinion or a course
of action, or even to keep a solemn oath, mark indelibly
those who have thus lost parts of their souls.  They wander
from one new cult to another even crazier.  Occasionally
such persons drift for a moment into the surrounding of The
MASTER THERION, and are shot out by the simple process of
making them try to do a half-hour's honest work of any kind.
   In projecting the Astral, it is a valuable additional
safeguard to perform the whole operation in a properly
consecrated circle.
 Proceed with great caution, then, but proceed.  In time
your Body of Light will be as strong against spirits as your
other body against the winds of Heaven.  All depends upon
the development of that Body of Light.  It must be furnished
with an organism as ramified and balanced as its shadowy
brother, the material body.
   To recapitulate once more, then, the first task is to
develop your own Body of light within your own circle
without reference to any other inhabitants of the world to
which it belongs.
 That which you have accomplished with the subject you may
now proceed to do with the object.  You will learn to see
the astral appearance of material things; and although this
does not properly belong to pure clairvoyance, one may here
again mention that you should endeavour to the utmost to
develop and fortify this Body of Light.  The best and
simplest way to do this is to use it constantly, to exercise
it in every way.  In particular it may be employed in
ceremonies of initiation or of invocation --- while the
physical body remains silent and still.
   In doing this it will often be necessary to create a
Temple on the astral plane.  It is excellent practice to
create symbols.  This one precaution is needed: after using
them, they should be reabsorbed.  {148}
   Having learned to create astral forms, the next step will
be at first very difficult.  Phantasmal and fleeting as the
astral is in general, those forms which are definitely
attached to the material possess enormous powers of
resistance, and it consequently requires very high potential
to influence them.  The material analogues seem to serve as
a fortress.  Even where a temporary effect is produced, the
inertia of matter draws it back to the normal; yet the power
of the trained and consecrated will in a well-developed
astral body is such that it can even produce a permanent
change in the material upon whose Body of Light you are
working, e.g.; one can heal the sick by restoring a healthy
appearance to their astral forms.  On the other hand, it is
possible so to disintegrate the Body of Light even of a
strong man that he will fall dead.
   Such operations demand not only power, but judgment.
Nothing can upset the sum total of destiny --- everything
must be paid for the uttermost farthing.  For this reason a
great many operations theoretically possible cannot be
performed.  Suppose, for example, you see two men of
similarly unhealthy astral appearance.  In one case the
cause may be slight and temporary.  Your help suffices to
restore him in a few minutes.  The other, who looks no
worse, is really oppressed by a force incalculably greater
than you could control, and you would only damage yourself
by attempting to help him.  The diagnosis between the two
cases could be made by an investigation of the deeper strata
of the astral, such as compose the"causal body".
   A body of black magicians under Anna Kingsford<<Anna
Kingsford, so far as her good work is concerned, was only
the rubber stamp of Edward Maitland.>> once attempted to
kill a vivisector who was not particularly well known; and
they succeeded in making him seriously ill.  But in
attempting the same thing with Pasteur they produced no
effect whatever, because Pasteur was a great genius --- an
adept in his own line far greater than she in hers --- and
because millions of people were daily blessing him.  It
cannot be too clearly understood that magical force is
subject to the same laws of proportion as any other kind of
force.  It is useless for a mere millionaire to try to
bankrupt a man who has the Bank of England behind him.
{149}
   To sum up, the first task is to separate the astral form
from the physical body, the second to develop the powers of
the astral body, in particular those of sight, travel, and
interpretation; third, to unify the two bodies without
muddling them.
 This being accomplished, the magician is fitted to deal
with the invisible.

                              II

   It is now useful to contine with considerations of other
planes, which have commonly been classed under the Astral.
There is some reason for this, as the delimitations are
somewhat vague.  Just as the vegetable kingdom merges into
the animal, and as the material plane has beings which
encroach upon the boundaries of the astral, so do we find it
in the higher planes.
   The mental images which appear during meditation are
subjective, and pertain not at all to the astral plane.
Only very rarely do astral images occur during meditation.
It is a bad break in the circle, as a rule, when they do.
   There is also a Magical Plane.  This touches the
material, and even includes a portion of it.  It includes
the Astral, chiefly a full-blooded type of the Astral.  It
reaches to and includes most, if not all, of the spiritual
planes.
   The Magical plane is thus the most comprehensive of all.
Egyptian Gods are typical inhabitants of this plane, and it
is the home of every Adept.
   The spiritual planes are of several types, but are all
distinguished by a reality and intensity to be found nowhere
else.  Their inhabitants are formless, free of space and
time, and distinguished by incomparable brilliance.
   There are also a number of sub-planes, as, for example,
the Alchemical.  This plane will often appear in the
practice of "Rising on the Planes"; its images are usually
those of gardens curiously kept, mountains furnished with
peculiar symbols, hieroglyphic animals, or such figures as
that of the "Hermetic Arcanum", and pictures like the
"Goldseekers" and the "Massacre of the Innocents" of Basil
Valentine.  There is a unique quality about the alchemical
Plane which renders its images immediately recognizable.
{150}
   There are also planes corresponding to various religions
past and present, all of which have their peculiar unity.
   It is of the utmost importance to the "Clairvoyant" or
"traveler in the fine body" to be able to find his way to
any desired plane, and operate therein as its ruler.
   The Neophyte of A.'. A.'. is examined most strictly in
this practice before he is passed to the degree of Zelator.
   In "Rising on the Planes" one must usually pass clear
through the Astral to the Spiritual.  Some will be unable to
do this.  The "fine body" which is good enough to subsist on
lower planes, a shadow among shadows, will fail to penetrate
the higher strata.  It requires a great development of this
body, and an intense infusion of the highest spiritual
constituents of man, before he can pierce the veils.  The
constant practice of Magick is the best preparation
possible.  Even though the human consciousness fail to reach
the goal, the consciousness of the fine body itself may do
so, wherefore whoso travels in that body on a subsequent
occasion may be found worthy; and its success will react
favourably on the human consciousness, and increase its
likelihood of success in its next magical operation.
   Similarly, the powers gained in this way will strengthen
the magician in his mediation-practices.  His Will becomes
better able to assist the concentration, to destroy the
mental images which disturb it, and to reject the lesser
rewards of that practice which tempt, and too often stop the
progress of, the mystic.
   Although it is said that the spiritual lies "beyond the
astral", this is theoretical;<<The Hon. Bertrand Russell's
"Principia Mathematica" may be said to "lie beyond"
Colenso's "School Arithmetic"; but one can take the former
book from one's shelves --- as every one should --- and read
it without first going all through the latter again.>> the
advanced Magician will not find it to be so in practice.  He
will be able by suitable invocation to travel directly to
any place desired.  In Liber 418 an example of perfection is
given.  The Adept who explored these Aethyrs did not have to
pass through and beyond the Universe, the whole of which yet
lies within even the inmost (30th) Aethyr.  He was able to
summon the Aethyrs he wanted, and His chief difficulty was
that sometimes {151} He was at first unable to pierce their
veils.  In fact, as the Book shows, it was only by virtue of
successive and most exalted initiations undergone in the
Aethyrs themselves that He was able to penetrate beyond the
15th.  The Guardians of such fortresses know how to guard.
   The MASTER THERION has published the most important
practical magical secrets in the plainest language.  No one,
by virtue of being clever or learned, has understood one
word; and those unworthy who have profaned the sacrament
have but eaten and drunken damnation to themselves.
   One may bring down stolen fire in a hollow tube from
Heaven, as The MASTER THERION indeed has done in a way that
no other adept dared to do before him.  But the thief, the
Titan, must foreknow and consent to his doom to be chained
upon a lonely rock, the vulture devouring his liver, for a
season, until Hercules, the strong man armed by virtue of
that very fire, shall come and release him.
   The TEITAN<<GR:Tau-Epsilon-Iota-Tau-Alpha-Nu =
300+5+10+300+1+50 = 666.>> --- whose number is the number of
a man, six hundred and three score and six --- unsubdued,
consoled by Asia and Panthea, must send forth constant
showers of blessing not only upon Man whose incarnation he
is, but upon the tyrant and the persecutor.  His infinite
pain must thrill his heart with joy, since every pang is but
the echo of some new flame that leaps upon the earth lit by
his crime.
   For the Gods are the enemies of Man; it is Nature that
Man must overcome ere he enter into his kingdom.<<In another
sense, a higher sense, Nature is absolutely right
throughout.  The position is that the Magician discovers
himself imprisoned in a distorted Nature of Iniquity; and
his task is to disentangle it.  This is all to be studied in
The Book of Wisdom or Folly (Liber ALEPH, CXI) and in the
Master Therion's edition of the "Tao Teh King".  A rough
note from His Magical Diary is appended here:
   "All elements must at one time have been separate, ---
that would be the case with great heat.  Now when atoms get
to the sun, when we get to the sun, we get that immense,
extreme heat, and all the elements are themselves again.
Imagine that each atom of each element possesses the memory
of all his adventures in combination.  By the way, that atom
(fortified with that memory) would not be the same atom; yet
it is, because it has gained nothing from anywhere except
this memory.  Therefore, by the lapse of time, and by virtue
of memory, a thing could become something more than itself;
and thus a real development is possible.  One can then see a
reason for any element deciding to go through this series of
incarnations; because so, and only so, can he go; and he
suffers the lapse of memory which he has during these
incarnations, because he knows he will come through
unchanged.
 "Therefore you can have an infinite number of gods,
individual and equal though diverse, each one supreme and
utterly indestructible.  This is also the only explanation
of how a being could create a war {WEH NOTE: SIC, probably
should be "world"} in which war, evil, etc. exist.  Evil is
only an appearance, because, (like "good") it cannot affect
the substance itself, but only multiply its combinations.
This is something the same as mystic monotheism, but the
objection to that theory is that God has to create things
which are all parts of himself, so that their interplay is
false.  If we presuppose many elements, their interplay is
natural.  It is no objection to this theory to ask who made
the elements, --- the elements are at least there, and God,
when you look for him, is not there.  Theism is "obscurum
per obscurius."  A male star is built up from the centre
outwards; a female from the circumference inwards.  This is
what is meant when we say that woman has no soul.  It
explains fully the difference between the sexes.>>  The true
God {152} is man.  In man are all things hidden.  Of these
the Gods, Nature, Time, all the powers of the universe are
rebellious slaves.  It is these that men must fight and
conquer in the power and in the name of the Beast that hath
availed them, the Titan, the Magus, the Man whose number is
six hundred and three score and six.

                               III

   The practice of Rising on the Planes is of such
importance that special attention must be paid to it.  It is
part of the essential technique of Magick.  Instruction in
this practice has been given with such conciseness in Liber
O, that one cannot do better than quote verbatim (the
"previous experiment" referred to in the first sentence is
the ordinary astral journey.):
   "1.  The previous experiment has little value, and leads
to few results of importance.  But it is susceptible of a
development which merges into a form of Dharana ---
concentration --- and as such may lead to the very highest
ends.  The principal use of the practice in {153} the last
chapter is to familiarise the student with every kind of
obstacle and every kind of delusion, so that he may be
perfect master of every idea that may arise in his brain, to
dismiss it, to transmute it, to cause it instantly to obey
his will.
   "2.  Let him then begin exactly as before; but with the
most intense solemnity and determination.
   "3.  Let him be very careful to cause his imaginary body
to rise in a line exactly perpendicular to the earth's
tangent at the point where his physical body is situated
(or, to put it more simply, straight upwards).
   "4.  Instead of stopping, let him continue to rise until
fatigue almost overcomes him.  If he should find that he has
stopped without willing to do so, and that figures appear,
let him at all costs rise above them.  Yea, though his very
life tremble on his lips, let him force his way upward and
onward!
   "5.  Let him continue in this so long as the breath of
life is in him.  Whatever threatens, whatever allures,
though it were Typhon and all his hosts loosed from the pit
and leagued against him, though it were from the very Throne
of God himself that a voice issues bidding him stay and be
content, let him struggle on, ever on.
   "6.  At last there must come a moment when his whole
being is swallowed up in fatigue, overwhelmed by its own
inertia.  Let him sink (when no longer can he strive, though
his tongue be bitten through with the effort and the blood
gush from his nostrils) into the blackness of
unconsciousness; and then on coming to himself, let him
write down soberly and accurately a record of all that hath
occurred: yea, a record of all that hath occurred."

   Of course, the Rising may be done from any starting pint.
One can go (for example) into the circle of Jupiter, and the
results, especially in the lower planes, will be very
different to those obtained from a Saturnian starting point.
   The student should undertake a regular series of such
experiments, in order to familiarise himself not only with
the nature of the different spheres, but with the inner
meaning of each.  Of course, it is not necessary in every
case to push the {154} practice to exhaustion, as described
in the instructions, but this is the proper thing to do
whenever definitely practising, in order to acquire the
power of Rising.  But, having obtained this power, it is, of
course, legitimate to rise to any particular plane that may
be necessary for the purpose of exploration, as in the case
of the visions recorded in Liber 418, where the method may
be described as mixed.  In such a case, it is not enough to
invoke the place you wish to visit, because you may not be
able to endure its pressure, or to breathe its atmosphere.
Several instances occur in that record where the seer was
unable to pass through certain gateways, or to remain in
certain contemplations.  He had to undergo certain
Initiations before he was able to proceed.  Thus, it is
necessary that the technique of Magick should be perfected.
The Body of Light must be rendered capable of going
everywhere and doing everything.  It is, therefore, always
the question of drill which is of importance.  You have got
to go out Rising on the Planes every day of your life, year
after year.  You are not to be disheartened by failure, or
too much encouraged by success, in any one practice or set
of practices.  What you are doing is what will be of real
value to you in the end; and that is, developing a
character, creating a Karma, which will give you the power
to do your will.

                              IV

   Divination is so important a branch of Magick as almost
to demand a separate treatise.
 Genius is composed of two sides; the active and the
passive.  The power to execute the Will is but blind force
unless the Will be enlightened.  At every stage of a Magical
Operation it is necessary to know what one is doing, and to
be sure that one is acting wisely.  Acute sensitiveness is
always associated with genius; the power to perceive the
universe accurately, to analyse, coordinate, and judge
impressions is the foundation of all great Work.  An army is
but a blundering brute unless its intelligence department
works as it should.
   The Magician obtains the transcendental knowledge
necessary to an intelligent course of conduct directly in
consciousness by clairvoyance and clairaudience; but
communication with superior {155} intelligences demands
elaborate preparation, even after years of successful
performance.
   It is therefore useful to possess an art by which one can
obtain at a moment's notice any information that may be
necessary.  This art is divination.  The answers to one's
questions in divination are not conveyed directly but
through the medium of a suitable series of symbols.  These
symbols must be interpreted by the diviner in terms of his
problem.  It is not practicable to construct a lexicon in
which the solution of every difficulty is given in so many
words.  It would be unwieldy; besides, nature does not
happen to work on those lines.
   The theory of any process of divination may be stated in
a few simple terms.
   1. We postulate the existence of intelligences, either
within or without the diviner, of which he is not
immediately conscious. (It does not matter to the theory
whether the communicating spirit so-called is an objective
entity or a concealed portion of the diviner's mind.)  We
assume that such intelligences are able to reply correctly -
-- within limits --- to the questions asked.
   2. We postulate that it is possible to construct a
compendium of hieroglyphs sufficiently elastic in meaning to
include every possible idea, and that one or more of these
may always be taken to represent any idea.  We assume that
any of these hieroglyphics will be understood by the
intelligences with whom we wish to communicate in the same
sense as it is by ourselves.  We have therefore a sort of
language.  One may compare it to a "lingua franca" which is
perhaps defective in expressing fine shades of meaning, and
so is unsuitable for literature, but which yet serves for
the conduct of daily affairs in places where many tongues
are spoken.  Hindustani is an example of this.  But better
still is the analogy between the conventional signs and
symbols employed by mathematicians, who can thus convey
their ideas perfectly<<As a matter of fact, they cannot.
The best qualified are the most diffident as to having
grasped the meaning of their colleagues with exactitude; in
criticising their writings they often make a point of
apologising for possible misunderstanding.>> without
speaking a word of each other's languages.  {156}
   3. We postulate that the intelligences whom wish to
consul are willing, or may be compelled, to answer us
truthfully.
   Let us first consider the question of the compendium of
symbols.  The alphabet of a language is a more or less
arbitrary way of transcribing the sounds employed in
speaking it.  The letters themselves have not necessarily
any meaning as such.  But in a system of divination each
symbol stands for a definite idea.  It would not interfere
with the English language to add a few new letters.  In
fact, some systems of shorthand have done so.  But a system
of symbols suitable for divination must be a complete
representation of the Universe, so that each is absolute,
and the whole insusceptible to increase or diminution.  It
is (in fact) technically a pantacle in the fullest sense of
the word.
   Let us consider some prominent examples of such system.
We may observe that a common mode of divination is to
inquire of books by placing the thumb at random within the
leaves.  The Books of the Sybil, the works of Vergil, and
the Bible have been used very frequently for this purpose.
For theoretical justification, one must assume that the book
employed is a perfect representation of the Universe.  But
even if this were the case, it is an inferior form of
construction, because the only reasonable conception of the
Cosmos is mathematical and hieroglyphic rather than
literary.  In the case of a book, such as the Book of the
Law which is the supreme truth and the perfect rule of life,
it is not repugnant to good sense to derive an oracle from
its pages.  It will of course be remarked that the Book of
the Law is not merely a literary compilation but a complex
mathematical structure.  It therefore fulfils the required
conditions.
   The principal means of divination in history are
astrology, geomancy, the Tarot, the Holy Qabalah, and the Yi
King.  There are hundreds of others; from pyromancy,
oneiromancy, auguries from sacrifices, and the spinning-top
of some ancient oracles to the omens drawn from the flight
of birds and the prophesying of tea-leaves.  It will be
sufficient for our present purpose to discuss only the five
systems first enumerated.
   ASTROLOGY is theoretically a perfect method, since the
symbols employed actually exist in the macrocosm, and thus
possess a {157} natural correspondence with microcosmic
affairs.  But in practice the calculations involved are
overwhelmingly complicated.  A horoscope is never complete.
It needs to be supplemented by innumerable other horoscopes.
For example, to obtain a judgment on the simplest question,
one requires not only the nativities of the people involved,
some of which are probably inaccessible, but secondary
figures for directions and transits, together with
progressed horoscopes, to say nothing of prenatal, mundane,
and even horary figures.  To appreciate the entire mass of
data, to balance the elements of so vast a concourse of
forces, and to draw a single judgment therefrom, is a task
practically beyond human capacity.  Besides all this, the
actual effects of the planetary positions and aspects are
still almost entirely unknown.  No two astrologers agree on
all points; and most of them are at odds on fundamental
principles.<<Nearly all professional astrologers are
ignorant of their own subject, as of all others.>>  This
science had better be discarded unless the student chances
to feel strongly drawn toward it.  It is used by the MASTER
THERION Himself with fairly satisfactory results, but only
in special cases, in a strictly limited sphere, and with
particular precautions.  Even so, He feels great diffidence
in basing His conduct on the result so obtained.
   GEOMANCY has the advantage of being rigorously
mathematical.  A hand-book of the science is to be found in
Equinox I, II.  The objection to its use lies in the limited
number of the symbols.  To represent the Universe by no more
than 16 combinations throws too much work upon them.  There
is also a great restriction arising from the fact that
although 15 symbols appear in the final figure, there are,
in reality, but 4, the remaining 11 being drawn by an
ineluctable process from the "Mothers".  It may be added
that the tables given in the handbook for the interpretation
of the figure are exceedingly vague on the one hand, and
insufficiently comprehensive on the other.  Some Adepts,
however, appear to find this system admirable, and obtain
great satisfaction from its use.  Once more, the personal
equation must be allowed full weight.  At one time the
MASTER THERION employed it extensively; but He was never
wholly at ease with it; He found the {158} interpretation
very difficult.  Moreover, it seemed to Him that the
geomantic intelligences themselves were of a low order, the
scope of which was confined to a small section of the things
which interested Him; also, they possessed a point of view
of their own which was far from sympathetic with His, so
that misunderstanding constantly interfered with the Work.
 THE TAROT and THE HOLY QABALAH may be discussed together.
The theoretical basis of both is identical: The Tree of
Life.<<Both these subjects may be studied in the Equinox in
several articles appearing in several numbers.>> The 78
symbols of the Tarot are admirably balanced and combined.
They are adequate to all demands made upon them; each symbol
is not only mathematically precise, but possesses an
artistic significance which helps the diviner to understand
them by stimulating his aesthetic perceptions.  The MASTER
THERION finds that the Tarot is infallible in material
questions.  The successive operations describe the course of
events with astonishing wealth of detail, and the judgments
are reliable in all respects.  But a proper divination means
at least two hours' hard work, even by the improved method
developed by Him from the traditions of initiates.  Any
attempt to shorten the proceedings leads to disappointment;
furthermore, the symbols do not lend themselves readily to
the solution of spiritual questions.
   The Holy Qabalah, based as it is on pure number,
evidently possesses an infinite number of symbols.  Its
scope is conterminous with existence itself; and it lacks
nothing in precision, purity, or indeed in any other
perfection.  But it cannot be taught;<<It is easy to teach
the General Principles of exegesis, and the main doctrines.
There is a vast body of knowledge common to all cases; but
this is no more than the basis on which the student must
erect his original Research.>> each man must select for
himself the materials for the main structure of his system.
It requires years of work to erect a worthy building.  Such
a building is never finished; every day spent on it adds new
ornaments.  The Qabalah is therefore a living Temple of the
Holy Ghost.  It is the man himself and his universe
expressed in terms of thought whose {159} language is so
rich that even the letters of its alphabet have no limit.
This system is so sublime that it is unsuited to the
solution of the petty puzzles of our earthly existence.  In
the light of the Qabalah, the shadows of transitory things
are instantly banished.
   The YI KING is the most satisfactory system for general
work.  The MASTER THERION is engaged in the preparation of a
treatise on the subject, but the labour involved is so great
that He cannot pledge Himself to have it ready at any
definite time.  The student must therefore make his own
investigations into the meaning of the 64 hexagrams as best
he can.
   The Yi King is mathematical and philosophical in form.
Its structure is cognate with that of the Qabalah; the
identity is so intimate that the existence of two such
superficially different systems is transcendent testimony to
the truth of both.  It is in some ways the most perfect
hieroglyph ever constructed.  It is austere and sublime, yet
withal so adaptable to every possible emergency that its
figures may be interpreted to suit all classes of questions.
One may resolve the most obscure spiritual difficulties no
less than the most mundane dilemmas; and the symbol which
opens the gates of the most exalted palaces of initiation is
equally effective when employed to advise one in the
ordinary business of life.  The MASTER THERION has found the
Yi King entirely satisfactory in every respect.  The
intelligences which direct it show no inclination to evade
the question or to mislead the querent.  A further advantage
is that the actual apparatus is simple.  Also the system is
easy to manipulate, and five minutes is sufficient to obtain
a fairly detailed answer to any but the most obscure
questions.
   With regard to the intelligences whose business it is to
give information to the diviner, their natures differ
widely, and correspond more or less to the character of the
medium of divination.  Thus, the geomantic intelligences are
gnomes, spirits of an earthy nature, distinguished from each
other by the modifications due to the various planetary and
zodiacal influences which pertain to the several symbols.
The intelligence governing Puella is not to be confused with
that of Venus or of Libra.  It is simply a particular
terrestrial daemon which partakes of those natures.  {160}
   The Tarot, on the other hand, being a book, is under
Mercury, and the intelligence of each card is fundamentally
Mercurial.  Such symbols are therefore peculiarly proper to
communicate thought.  They are not gross, like the geomantic
daemons; but, as against this, they are unscrupulous in
deceiving the diviner.<<This does not mean that they are
malignant.  They have a proper pride in their office as
Oracles of Truth; and they refuse to be profaned by the
contamination of inferior and impure intelligences.  A
Magician whose research is fully adapted to his Neschamah
will find them lucid and reliable.>>
   The Yi King is served by beings free from these defects.
The intense purity of the symbols prevent them from being
usurped by intelligences with an axe of their own to
grind.<<Malicious or pranksome elementals instinctively
avoid the austere sincerity of the Figures of Fu and King
Wan.>>
   It is always essential for the diviner to obtain absolute
magical control over the intelligences of the system which
he adopts.  He must not leave the smallest loop-hole for
being tricked, befogged, or mocked.  He must not allow them
to use casuistry in the interpretation of his questions.  It
is a common knavery, especially in geomancy, to render an
answer which is literally true, and yet deceives.  For
instance, one might ask whether some business transaction
would be profitable, and find, after getting an affirmative
answer, that it really referred to the other party to the
affair!
   There is, on the surface, no difficulty at all in getting
replies.  In fact, the process is mechanical; success is
therefore assured, bar a stroke of apoplexy.  But, even
suppose we are safe from deceit, how can we know that the
question has really been put to another mind, understood
rightly, and answered from knowledge?  It is obviously
possible to check one's operations by clairvoyance, but this
is rather like buying a safe to keep a brick in.  Experience
is the only teacher.  One acquires what one may almost call
a new sense.  One feels in one's self whether one is right
or not.  The diviner must develop this sense.  It resembles
the exquisite sensibility of touch which is found in the
great billiard player whose fingers can estimate
infinitesimal degrees of force, {161} or the similar
phenomenon in the professional taster of tea or wine who can
distinguish fantastically subtle differences of flavour.
 It is a hard saying; but in the order to divine without
error, one ought to be a Master of the Temple.  Divination
affords excellent practice for those who aspire to that
exalted eminence, for the faintest breath of personal
preference will deflect the needle from the pole of truth in
the answer.  Unless the diviner have banished utterly from
his mind the minutest atom of interest in the answer to his
question, he is almost certain to influence that answer in
favour of his personal inclinations.
   The psycho-analyst will recall the fact that dreams are
phantasmal representations of the unconscious Will of the
sleeper, and that not only are they images of that Will
instead of representations of objective truth, but the image
itself is confused by a thousand cross-currents set in
motion by the various complexes and inhibitions of his
character.  If therefore one consults the oracle, one must
take sure that one is not consciously or unconsciously
bringing pressure to bear upon it.  It is just as when an
Englishman cross-examines a Hindu, the ultimate answer will
be what the Hindu imagines will best please the inquirer.
   The same difficulty appears in a grosser form when one
receives a perfectly true reply, but insists on interpreting
it so as to suit one's desires.  The vast majority of people
who go to "fortunetellers" have nothing else in mind but the
wish to obtain supernatural sanction for their follies.
Apart from Occultism altogether, every one knows that when
people ask for advice, they only want to be told how wise
they are.  Hardly any one acts on the most obviously
commonsense counsel if it happens to clash with his previous
intentions.  Indeed, who would take counsel unless he were
warned by some little whisper in his heart that he was about
to make a fool of himself, which he is determined to do, and
only wants to be able to blame his best friend, or the
oracle, when he is overtaken by the disaster which his own
interior mentor foresees?
   Those who embark on divination will be wise to consider
the foregoing remarks very deeply.  They will know when they
are getting deep enough by the fact of the thought beginning
to hurt them.  It is essential to explore oneself to the
utmost, to analyse {162} one's mind until one can be
positive, beyond the possibility of error, that one is able
to detach oneself entirely from the question.  The oracle is
a judge; it must be beyond bribery and prejudice.
   It is impossible in practice to lay down rules for the
interpretation of symbols.  Their nature must be
investigated by intellectual methods such as the Qabalah,
but the precise shape of meaning in any one case, and the
sphere and tendency of its application, must be acquired by
experience, that is, but induction, by recording and
classifying one's experiments over a long period; and ---
this is the better part --- by refining one's ratiocination
to the point where it becomes instinct or intuition,
whichever one likes to call it.
   It is proper in cases where the sphere of the question is
well marked to begin the divination by invocations of the
forces thereto appropriate.  An error of judgment as to the
true character of the question would entail penalties
proportionate to the extent of that error; and the delusions
resulting from a divination fortified by invocation would be
more serious than if one had not employed such heavy
artillery.<<The apparent high sanction for the error would
fortify the obstinacy of the mule.>>
   There can, however, be no objection to preparing oneself
by a general purification and consecration devised with the
object of detaching oneself from one's personality and
increasing the sensitiveness of one's faculties.
   All divination comes under the general type of the
element Air.  The peculiar properties of air are in
consequence its uniform characteristics.  Divination is
subtle and intangible.  It moves with mysterious ease,
expanding, contracting, flowing, responsive to the slightest
stress.  It receives and transmits every vibration without
retaining any.  It becomes poisonous when its oxygen is
defiled by passing through human lungs.
 There is a peculiar frame of mind necessary to successful
divination.  The conditions of the problem are difficult.
It is obviously necessary for the mind of the diviner to be
concentrated absolutely upon his question.  Any intrusive
thought will confuse the oracle as certainly as the reader
of a newspaper is confused {163} when he reads a paragraph
into which a few lines have strayed from another column.  It
is equally necessary that the muscles with which he
manipulates the apparatus of divination must be entirely
independent of any volition of his.  He must lend them for
the moment to the intelligence whom he is consulting, to be
guided in their movement to make the necessary mechanical
actions which determine the physical factor of the
operation.  It will be obvious that this is somewhat awkward
for the diviner who is also a magician, for as a magician he
has been constantly at work to keep all his forces under his
own control, and to prevent the slightest interference with
them by any alien Will.  It is, in fact, commonly the case,
or so says the experience of The MASTER THERION, that the
most promising Magicians are the most deplorable diviners,
and vice versa.  It is only when the aspirant approaches
perfection that he becomes able to reconcile these two
apparently opposing faculties.  Indeed, there is no surer
sign of all-round success than this ability to put the whole
of one's powers at the service of any type of task.
   With regard to the mind, again, it would seem that
concentration on the question makes more difficult the
necessary detachment from it.  Once again, the diviner
stands in need of a considerable degree of attainment in the
practices of meditation.  He must have succeeded in
destroying the tendency of the ego to interfere with the
object of thought.  He must be able to conceive of a thing
out of all relation with anything else.  The regular
practice of concentration leads to this result; in fact, it
destroys the thing itself as we have hitherto conceived it;
for the nature of things is always veiled from us by our
habit of regarding them as in essential relation without
ourselves and our reactions toward them.
 One can hardly expect the diviner to make Samadhi with his
question --- that would be going too far, and destroy the
character of the operation by removing the question from the
class of concatenated ideas.  It would mean interpreting the
question in terms of "without limit", and this imply an
equally formless answer.  But he should approximate to this
extreme sufficiently to allow the question entire freedom to
make for itself its own proper links with the intelligence
directing the answer, {164} preserving its position on its
own plane, and evoking the necessary counterpoise to its own
deviation from the norm of nothingness.
   We may recapitulate the above reflections in a practical
form.  We will suppose that one wishes to divine by geomancy
whether or no one should marry, it being assumed that one's
emotional impulses suggest so rash a course.  The man takes
his wand and his sand; the traces the question, makes the
appropriate pentagram, and the sigil of the spirit.  Before
tracing the dashes which are to determine the four
"Mothers", he must strictly examine himself.  He must banish
from his mind every thought which can possibly act as an
attachment to his proposed partner.  He must banish all
thoughts which concern himself, those of apprehension no
less than those of ardour.  He must carry his introspection
as far as possible.  He must observe with all the subtlety
at his command whether it pains him to abandon any of these
thoughts.  So long as his mind is stirred, however slightly,
by one single aspect of the subject, he is not fit to begin
to form the figure.  He must sink his personality in that of
the intelligence hearing the question propounded by a
stranger to whom he is indifferent, but whom it is his
business to serve faithfully.  He must now run over the
whole affair in his mind, making sure of this utter
aloofness therefrom.  He must also make sure that his
muscles are perfectly free to respond to the touch of the
Will of that intelligence.  (It is of course understood that
he has not become so familiar with geomancy by dint of
practice as to be able to calculate subconsciously what
figures he will form; for this would vitiate the experiment
entirely.  It is, in fact, one of the objections to geomancy
that sooner or later one does become aware at the time of
tracing them whether the dots are going to be even or odd.
This needs a special training to correct).
   Physio-psychological theory will probably maintain that
the "automatic" action of the hand is controlled by the
brain no less than in the case of conscious volition; but
this is an additional argument for identifying the brain
with the intelligence invoked.
   Having thus identified himself as closely as possible
with that intelligence, and concentrated on the question as
if the "prophesying spirit" were giving its whole attention
thereto, he must {165} await the impulse to trace the marks
on the sand; and, as soon as it comes let it race to the
finish.  Here arises another technical difficulty.  One has
to make 16 rows of dots; and, especially for the beginner,
the mind has to grapple with the apprehension lest the hand
fail to execute the required number.  It is also troubled by
fearing to exceed; but excess does not matter.  Extra lines
are simply null and void, so that the best plan is to banish
that thought, and make sure only of not stopping too
soon.<<Practice soon teaches one to count subconsciously ...
yes, and that is the other difficulty again!>>
   The lines being traced, the operation is over as far as
spiritual qualities are required, for a time.  The process
of setting up the figure for judgment is purely mechanical.
   But, in the judgment, the diviner stands once more in
need of his inmost and utmost attainments.  He should
exhaust the intellectual sources of information at his
disposal, and form from them his judgment.  But having done
this, he should detach his mind from what it has just
formulated, and proceed to concentrate it on the figure as a
whole, almost as if it were the object of his meditation.
One need hardly repeat that in both these operations
detachment from one's personal partialities is as necessary
as it was in the first part of the work.  In setting up the
figure, bias would beget a Freudian phantasm to replace the
image of truth which the figure ought to be; and it is not
too much to say that the entire subconscious machinery of
the body and mind lends itself with horrid willingness to
this ape-like antic of treason.  But now that the figure
stands for judgment, the same bias would tend to form its
phantasm of wish-fulfilment in a different manner.  It would
act through the mind to bewray sound judgment.  It might,
for example, induce one to emphasize the Venereal element in
Puella at the expense of the Saturnian.  It might lead one
to underrate the influence of a hostile figure, or to
neglect altogether some element of importance.  The MASTER
THERION has known cases where the diver was so afraid of an
unfavourable answer that he made actual mistakes in the
simple mechanical construction of the figure!  Finally, in
the {166} summing up; it is fatally easy to slur over
unpleasantness, and to breathe on the tiniest spark that
promises to kindle the tinder --- the rotten rags! --- of
hope.
   The concluding operation is therefore to obtain a
judgment of the figure, independent of all intellectual or
moral restraint.  One must endeavour to apprehend it as a
thing absolute in itself.  One must treat it, in short, very
much the same as one did the question; as a mystical entity,
till now unrelated with other phenomena.  One must, so to
speak, adore it as a god, uncritically: "Speak, Lord, for
thy servant heareth."  It must be allowed to impose its
intrinsic individuality on the mind, to put its fingers
independently on whatever notes it pleases.
   In this way one obtains an impression of the true purport
of the answer; and one obtains it armed with a sanction
superior to any sensible suggestions.  It comes from and to
a part of the individual which is independent of the
influence of environment; is adjusted to that environment by
true necessity, and not by the artifices of such adaptations
as our purblind conception of convenience induces us to
fabricate.
   The student will observe from the above that  divination
is in one sense an art entirely separate from that of
Magick; yet it interpenetrates Magick at every point.  The
fundamental laws of both are identical.  The right use of
divination has already been explained; but it must be added
that proficiency therein, tremendous as is its importance in
furnishing the Magician with the information necessary to
his strategical and tactical plans,  in no wise enables him
to accomplish the impossible.  It is not within the scope of
divination to predict the future (for example) with the
certainty of an astronomer in calculating the return of a
comet.<<The astronomer himself has to enter a caveat.  He
can only calculate the probability on the observed facts.
Some force might interfere with the anticipated movement.>>
There is always much virtue in divination; for (Shakespeare
assures us!) there is "much virtue in IF"!
   In estimating the ultimate value of a divinatory
judgment, one must allow for more than the numerous sources
of error inherent {167} in the process itself.  The judgment
can do no more than the facts presented to it warrant.  It
is naturally impossible in most cases to make sure that some
important factor has not been omitted.  In asking, "shall I
be wise to marry?" one leaves it open for wisdom to be
defined in divers ways.  One can only expect an answer in
the sense of the question.  The connotation of "wise" would
then imply the limitations "in your private definition of
wisdom", "in reference to your present circumstances."  It
would not involve guarantee against subsequent disaster, or
pronounce a philosophical dictum as to wisdom in the
abstract sense.  One must not assume that the oracle is
omniscient.  By the nature of the case, on the contrary, it
is the utterance of a being whose powers are partial and
limited, though not to such an extent, or in the same
directions, as one's own.  But a man who is advised to
purchase a certain stock should not complain if a general
panic knocks the bottom out of it a few weeks later.  The
advice only referred to the prospects of the stock in
itself.  The divination must not be blamed any more than one
would blame a man for buying a house at Ypres there years
before the World-War.
 As against this, one must insist that it is obviously to
the advantage of the diviner to obtain this information from
beings of the most exalted essence available.  An old witch
who has a familiar spirit of merely local celebrity such as
the toad in her tree, can hardly expect him to tell her much
more of private matters than her parish magazine does of
public.  It depends entirely on the Magician how he is
served.  The greater the man, the greater must be his
teacher.  It follows that the highest forms of communicating
daemons, those who know, so to speak, the court secrets,
disdain to concern themselves with matters which they regard
as beneath them.  One must not make the mistake of calling
in a famous physician to one's sick Pekinese.  One must also
beware of asking even the cleverest angel a question outside
his ambit.  A heart specialist should not prescribe for
throat trouble.
   The Magician ought therefore to make himself master of
several methods of divination; using one or the other as the
purpose of the moment dictates.  He should make a point of
organizing a staff of such spirits to suit various {168}
occasions.  These should be "familiar"spirits, in the strict
sense; members of his family.  He should deal with them
constantly, avoiding whimsical or capricious changes.  He
should choose them so that their capacities cover the whole
ground of his work; but he should not multiply them
unnecessarily, for he makes himself responsible for each one
that he employs.  Such spirits should be ceremonially evoked
to visible or semi-visible appearance.  A strict arrangement
should be made and sworn.  This must be kept punctiliously
by the Magician, and its infringement by the spirit severely
punished.  Relations with these spirits should be confirmed
and encouraged by frequent intercourse.  They should be
treated with courtesy, consideration, and even affection.
They should be taught to love and respect their master, and
to take pride in being trusted by him.
   It is sometimes better to act on the advice of a spirit
even when one knows it to be wrong, though in such a case
one must take the proper precautions against an undesirable
result.  The reason for this is that spirits of this type
are very sensitive.  They suffer agonies of remorse on
realising that they have injured their Master; for he is
their God; they know themselves to be part of him, their aim
is to attain to absorption in him.  They understand
therefore that his interests are theirs.  Care must be taken
to employ none but spirits who are fit for the purpose, not
only by reason of their capacity to supply information, but
for their sympathy with the personality of the Magician.
Any attempt to coerce unwilling spirits is dangerous.  They
obey from fear; their fear makes them flatter, and tell
amiable falsehoods.  It also creates phantasmal projections
of themselves to personate them; and these phantasms,
besides being worthless, become the prey of malicious
daemons who use them to attack the Magician in various ways
whose prospect of success is enhanced by the fact that he
has himself created a link with them.
   One more observation seems desirable while on this
subject.  Divination of any kind is improper in matters
directly concerning the Great Work itself.  In the Knowledge
and Conversation of his Holy Guardian Angel, the adept is
possessed of all he can possibly need.  To consult any other
is to insult one's {169} Angel.  Moreover, it is to abandon
the only person who really knows, and really cares, in
favour of one who by the nature of the case, must be
ignorant<<No intelligence of the type that operates
divination is a complete Microcosm as Man is.  He knows in
perfection what lies within his own Sphere, and little or
nothing beyond it.  Graphiel knows all that is knowable
about Marital matters, as no Man can possibly do.  For even
the most Marital man is limited as to Madim by the fact that
Mars is only one element in his molecule; the other elements
both inhibit concentration on their colleague, and veil him
by insisting on his being interpreted in reference to
themselves.  No entity whose structure does not include the
entire Tree of Life is capable of the Formulae of
Initiation.  Graphiel, consulted by the Aspirants to
Adeptship, would be bound to regard the Great Work as purely
a question of combat, and ignore all other considerations.
His advice would be absolute on technical points of this
kind; but its very perfection would persuade the Aspirant to
an unbalance course of action which would entail failure and
destruction.  It is pertinent to mention in this connection
that one must not expect absolute information as to what is
going to happen.  "Fortune-telling" is an abuse of
divination.  At the utmost one can only ascertain what may
reasonably be expected.  The proper function of the process
is to guide one's judgment.  Diagnosis is fairly reliable;
advice may be trusted, generally speaking; but prognosis
should always be cautious.  The essence of the business is
the consultation of specialists.>> of the essence of the
matter --- one whose interest in it is no more (at the best)
than that of a well-meaning stranger.  It should go without
saying that until the Magician has attained to the Knowledge
and Conversation of his Holy Guardian Angel he is liable to
endless deceptions.  He does not know Himself; how can he
explain his business to others?  How can those others,
though they do their best for him, aid in anything but
trifles?  One must therefore be prepared for disappointment
at every stage until one attains to adeptship.

   This is especially true of divination, because the
essence of the horror of not knowing one's Angel is the
utter bewilderment and anguish of the mind, complicated by
the persecution of the body, and envenomed by the ache of
the soul.  One puts the wrong questions, and puts them
wrong; gets the wrong answers, judges them wrong, and acts
wrongly upon them.  One must nevertheless persist, aspiring
with ardour towards one's Angel, and comforted {170} by the
assurance that He is guiding one secretly towards Himself,
and that all one's mistakes are necessary preparations for
the appointed hour of meeting Him.  Each mistake is the
combing-out of some tangle in the hair of the bride as she
is being coiffed for marriage.
   On the other hand, although the adept is in daily
communication with his Angel, he ought to be careful to
consult Him only on questions proper to the dignity of the
relation.  One should not consult one's Angel on too many
details, or indeed on any matters which come within the
office of one's familiar spirits.  One does not go the the
King about petty personal trifles.  The romance and rapture
of the ineffable union which constitutes Adeptship must not
be profaned by the introduction of commonplace cares.  One
must not appear with one's hair in curl-papers, or complain
of the cook's impertinence, if one wants to make the most of
the honeymoon.<<As the poet puts it; "Psyche, beware how
thou disclose Thy tricks of toilet to Eros, Or let him learn
that those love-breathing Lyrical lips that whisper,
wreathing His brows with sense-bewitching gold, Are equally
expert to scold; That those caressing hands will maybe Yet
box his ears and slap the baby!">>
   To the Adept divination becomes therefore a secondary
consideration, although he can now employ it with absolute
confidence, and probably use it with far greater frequency
than before his attainment.  Indeed, this is likely in
proportion as he learns that resort to divination (on every
occasion when his Will does not instantly instruct him) with
implicit obedience to its counsels careless as to whether or
no they may land him in disaster, is a means admirably
efficacious of keeping his mind untroubled by external
impressions, and therefore in the proper condition to
receive the reiterant strokes of rapture with which the love
of his Angel ravishes him.
   We have now mapped out the boundaries of possibility and
propriety which define the physical and political geography
of divination.  The student must guard himself constantly
against supposing that this art affords any absolute means
of discovering "truth", or indeed, of using that word as if
it meant more than the {171} relation of two ideas each of
which is itself as subject to "change without notice" as a
musical programme.
   Divination, in the nature of things, can do no more than
put the mind of the querent into conscious connection with
another mind whose knowledge of the subject at issue is to
his own as that of an expert to a layman.  The expert is not
infallible.  The client may put his question in a misleading
manner, or even base it on a completely erroneous conception
of the facts.  He may misunderstand the expert's answer, and
he may misinterpret its purport.  Apart from all this,
excluding all error, both question and answer are limited in
validity by their own conditions; and these conditions are
such that truth may cease to be true, either as time goes
on, or if it be flawed by the defect of failure to consider
some circumstances whose concealed operation cancels the
contract.
   In a word, divination, like any other science, is
justified of its children.  It would be extraordinary should
so fertile a mother be immune from still-births,
monstrosities, and abortions.
   We none of us dismiss our servant science with a kick and
a curse every time the telephone gets out of order.  The
telephone people make no claim that it always works and
always works right.<<Except in New York City.>>  Divination,
with equal modesty, admits that "it often goes wrong; but it
works well enough, all things considered.  The science is in
its infancy.  All we can do is our best.  We no more pretend
to infallibility than the mining expert who considers
himself in luck if he hits the bull's eye four times in
ten."
   The error of all dogmatists (from the oldest prophet with
his "literally-inspired word of God" to the newest German
professor with his single-track explanation of the Universe)
lies in trying to prove too much, in defending themselves
against critics by stretching a probably excellent theory to
include all the facts and the fables, until it bursts like
the overblown bladder it is.
   Divination is no more than a rough and ready practical
method which we understand hardly at all, and operate only
as empirics.  Success for the best diviner alive is no more
certain in any particular instance than a long putt by a
champion golfer.  Its calculations {172} are infinitely more
complex than Chess, a Chess played on an infinite board with
men whose moves are indeterminate, and made still more
difficult by the interference of imponderable forces and
unformulated laws; while its conduct demands not only the
virtues, themselves rare enough, of intellectual and moral
integrity, but intuition combining delicacy with strength in
such perfection and to such extremes as to make its
existence appear monstrous and miraculous against Nature.
   To admit this is not to discredit oracles.  On the
contrary, the oracles fell into disrepute just because they
pretended to do more than they could.  To divine concerning
a matter is little more than to calculate probabilities.  We
obtain the use of minds who have access to knowledge beyond
ours, but not to omniscience.  HRU, the great angel set over
the Tarot, is beyond us as we are beyond the ant; but, for
all we know, the knowledge of HRU is excelled by some
mightier mind in the same proportion.  Nor have we any
warrant for accusing HRU of ignorance or error if we read
the Tarot to our own delusion.  He may have known, he may
have spoken truly; the fault may lie with our own
insight.<<The question of the sense in which an answer is
true arises.  One {WEH NOTE: sic, interpolate "should"} not
mix up the planes.  Yet as Mr.  Russell shows, "Op Cit. p".
61, the worlds which lie behind phenomena must possess the
same structure as our own.  "Every proposition having a
communicable significance must lie in just that essence of
individuality which, for that very reason, is irrelevant to
science".  Just so: but this is to confess the impotence of
science to attain truth, and to admit the urgency of
developing a mental instrument of superior capacity.>>
   The MASTER THERION has observed on innumerable occasions
that divinations, made by him and dismissed as giving untrue
answers, have justified themselves months or years later
when he was able to revise his judgment in perspective,
untroubled by his personal passion.
   It is indeed surprising how often the most careless
divinations give accurate answers.  When things go wrong, it
is almost always possible to trace the error to one's own
self-willed and insolent presumption in insisting that
events shall accommodate themselves to our egoism and
vanity.  It is comically unscientific to adduce {173}
examples of the mistakes of the diviners as evidence that
their art is fatuous.  Every one knows that the simplest
chemical experiments often go wrong.  Every one knows the
eccentricities of fountain pens; but nobody outside
Evangelical circles makes fun of the Cavendish experiment,
or asserts that, if fountain pens undoubtedly work now and
then, their doing so is merely coincidence.
   The fact of the case is that the laws of nature are
incomparably more subtle than even science suspects.  The
phenomena of every plane are intimately interwoven.  The
arguments of Aristotle were dependent on the atmospheric
pressure which prevented his blood from boiling away.  There
is nothing in the universe which does not influence every
other thing in one way or another.  There is no reason in
Nature why the apparently chance combination of half-a dozen
sticks of tortoise-shell should not be so linked both with
the human mind and with the entire structure of the Universe
that the observation of their fall should not enable us to
measure all things in heaven and earth.
   With one piece of curved glass we have discovered
uncounted galaxies of suns; with another, endless orders of
existence in the infinitesimal.  With the prism we have
analysed light so that matter and force have become
intelligible only as forms of light.  With a rod we have
summoned the invisible energies of electricity to be our
familiar spirit serving us to do our Will, whether it be to
outsoar the condor, or to dive deeper into the demon world
of disease than any of our dreamers dared to dream.
   Since with four bits of common glass mankind has learnt
to know so much, achieved so much, who dare deny that the
Book of Thoth, the quintessentialized wisdom of our
ancestors whose civilizations, perished though they be, have
left monuments which dwarf ours until we wonder whether we
are degenerate from them, or evolved from Simians, who dare
deny that such a book may be possessed of unimaginable
powers?
   It is not so long since the methods of modern science
were scoffed at by the whole cultured world.  In the sacred
halls themselves the roofs rang loud with the scornful
laughter of the high priests as each new postulant
approached with his unorthodox offering. {174} There is
hardly a scientific discovery in history which was not
decried as quackery by the very men whose own achievements
were scarce yet recognized by the world at large.
   Within the memory of the present generation, the
possibility of aeroplanes was derisively denied by those
very engineers accounted most expert to give their opinions.
   The method of divination, the "ratio" of it, is as
obscure to-day as was that of spectrum analysis a generation
ago.  That the chemical composition of the fixed stars
should become known to man seemed an insane imagining too
ridiculous to discuss.  To-day it seems equally irrational
to enquire of the desert sand concerning the fate of
empires.  Yet surely it, if any one knows, should know!
   To-day it may sound impossible for inanimate objects to
reveal the inmost secrets of mankind and nature.  We cannot
say why divination is valid.  We cannot trace the process by
which it performs it marvels.<<The main difference between a
Science and an Art is that the former admits mensuration.
Its processes must be susceptible of the application of
quantitative standards.  Its laws reject imponderable
variables.  Science despises Art for its refusal to conform
with calculable conditions.  But even to-day, in the boasted
Age of Science, man is still dependent on Art as to most
matters of practical importance to him; the arts of
Government, of War, of Literature, etc. are supremely
influential, and Science does little more than facilitate
them by making their materials mechanically docile.  The
utmost extension of Science can merely organize the
household of Art.  Art thus progresses in perception and
power by increased control or automatic accuracy of its
details.  The MASTER THERION has made an Epoch in the Art of
Magick by applying the Method of Science to its problems.
His Work is a contribution of unique value, comparable only
to that of those men of genius who revolutionized the
empirical guesswork of "natural philosophers".  The
Magicians of to-morrow will be armed with mathematical
theory, organized observation, and experimentally-verified
practice.  But their Art will remain inscrutable as ever in
essence; talent will never supplant genius.  Education is
impotent to produce a poet greater than Robert Burns; the
perfection of laboratory apparatus prepares indeed the path
of a Pasteur, but cannot make masters of mediocrities.>> But
the same objections apply equally well to the telephone.  No
man knows what electricity is, or the nature of the forces
which determine its action.  We know only that by doing
certain things we get certain results, and that the least
error {175} on our part will bring our work to naught.  The
same is exactly true of divination.  The difference between
the two sciences is not more than this: that, more minds
having been at work on the former we have learnt to master
its tricks with greater success than in the case of the
latter.


                           -----------


{176}






                            CHAPTER XIX

                        OF DRAMATIC RITUALS.

   The Wheel turns to  those effectual methods of invocation
employed in the ancient Mysteries and by certain secret
bodies of initiates to-day.  The object of them is almost
invariably<<The word is unwarrantably universal.  It would
not be impracticable to adopt this method to such operations
as Talismanic Magick.  For example, one might consecrate and
charge a Pantacle by the communication by AIWAZ to the
Scribe of the BOOK of the LAW, the Magician representing the
Angel, the Pantacle being the Book, and the person on whom
the Pantacle is intended to act taking the part of the
Scribe.>> the invocation of a God, that God conceived in a
more or less material and personal fashion.  These Rituals
are therefore well suited for such persons as are capable of
understanding the spirit of Magick as opposed to the letter.
One of the great advantages of them is that a large number
of persons may take part, so that there is consequently more
force available; but it is important that they should all be
initiates of the same mysteries, bound by the same oaths,
and filled with the same aspirations.  They should be
associated only for this one purpose.
   Such a company being prepared, the story of the God
should be dramatised by a well-skilled poet accustomed to
this form of composition.  Lengthy speeches and invocations
should be avoided, but action should be very full.  Such
ceremonies should be carefully rehearsed; but in rehearsals
care should be taken to omit the climax, which should be
studied by the principal character in private.  The play
should be so arranged that this climax depends on him alone.
By this means one prevents the ceremony from becoming
mechanical or hackneyed, and the element of surprise. {177}
assists the lesser characters to get out of themselves at
the supreme moment.  Following the climax there should
always be an unrehearsed ceremony, an impromptu.  The most
satisfactory form of this is the dance.  In such ceremonies
appropriate libations may be freely used.
   The Rite of Luna (Equinox I. VI) is a good example of
this use.  Here the climax is the music of the goddess, the
assistants remaining in silent ecstasy.
   In the rite of Jupiter the impromptu is the dance, in
that of Saturn long periods of silence.
   It will be noticed that in these Rites poetry and music
were largely employed --- mostly published pieces by well-
known authors and composers.  It would be better<<"PERHAPS!
One can think of certain Awful Consequences".  "But, after
all, they wouldn't seem so to the authors!" "But --- pity
the poor Gods!"  "Bother the Gods!">> to write and compose
specially for the ceremony<<A body of skilled Magicians
accustomed to work in concert may be competent to conduct
impromptu Orgia.  To cite an actual instance in recent
times; the blood of a Christian being required for some
purpose, a young cock was procured and baptized into the
Roman Catholic Church by a man who, being the son of an
ordained Priest, was magically an incarnation of the Being
of that Priest, and was therefore congenitally possessed of
the powers thereto appurtenant.  The cock, "Peter Paul," was
consequently a baptized Christian for all magical purposes.
Order was then taken to imprison the bird; which done, the
Magicians assuming respectively the characters of Herod,
Herodias, Salome, and the Executioner, acted out the scene
of the dance and the beheading, on the lines of Oscar
Wilde's drama, "Peter Paul" being cast for the part of John
the Baptist.  This ceremony was devised and done on the spur
of the moment, and its spontaneity and simplicity were
presumably potent factors in its success.
 On the point of theology, I doubt whether Dom Gorenflot
sucessfully avoided eating meat in Lent by baptizing the
pullet a carp.  For as the sacrament --- by its intention,
despite its defects of form --- could not fail of efficacy,
the pullet must have become a Christian, and therefore a
human being.  Carp was therefore only its baptized name ---
cf. Polycarp --- and Dom Gorenflot ate human flesh in Lent,
so that, for all he became a bishop, he is damned.>>.


                          ---------


{178}







                              CHAPTER XX

                          OF THE EUCHARIST
                      AND OF THE ART OF ALCHEMY

                                   I

  One of the simplest and most complete of Magick ceremonies
is the Eucharist.
   It consists in taking common things, transmuting them
into things divine, and consuming them.
   So far, it is a type of every magick ceremony, for the
reabsorption of the force is a kind of consumption; but it
has a more restricted application, as follows.
   Take a substance<<This may be of composite character.>>
symbolic of the whole course of nature, make it God, and
consume it.
   There are many ways of doing this; but they may easily be
classified according to the number of the elements of which
the sacrament is composed.
   The highest form of the Eucharist is that in which the
Element consecrated is One.
   It is one substance and not two, not living and not dead,
neither liquid nor solid, neither hot nor cold, neither male
nor female.
   This sacrament is secret in every respect.  For those who
may be worthy, although not officially recognized as such,
this Eucharist has been described in detail and without
concealment, "somewhere" in the published writings of the
MASTER THERION.  But He has told no one where.  It is
reserved for the highest initiates, and is synonymous with
the Accomplished Work on the {179} material plane.  It is
the Medicine of Metals, the Stone of the Wise, the Potable
Gold, the Elixir of Life that is consumed therein.  The
altar is the bosom of Isis, the eternal mother; the chalice
is in effect the Cup of our Lady Babalon Herself; the Wand
is that which Was and Is and Is To Come.
   The Eucharist of "two" elements has its matter of the
passives.  The wafer (pantacle) is of corn, typical of
earth; the wine (cup) represents water.  (There are certain
other attributions.  The Wafer is the Sun, for instance: and
the wine is appropriate to Bacchus).
   The wafer may, however, be more complex, the "Cake of
Light" described in Liber Legis.
   This is used in the exoteric Mass of the Phoenix (Liber
333, Cap: 44) mixed with the blood of the Magus.  This mass
should be performed daily at sunset by every magician.
   Corn and wine are equivalent to flesh and blood; but it
is easier to convert live substances into the body and blood
of God, than to perform this miracle upon dead matter.
   The Eucharist of "three" elements has for basis the
symbols of the three Gunas.  For Tamas (darkness) take opium
or nightshade or some sleepy medicine; for Rajas (activity)
take strychnine or other excitant; for Sattvas (calm) the
cakes of Light may again be suitable.<<The Cakes of Light
are universally applicable; they contain meal, honey, and
oil (carbohydrates, fats, and proteids, the three
necessaries of human nutrition): also perfume of the three
essential types of magical and curative virtue; the subtle
principle of animal life itself is fixed in them by the
introduction of fresh living blood.>>
   The Eucharist of "four" elements consists of fire, air,
water, and earth.  These are represented by a flame for
fire, by incense or roses for air, by wine for water, and by
bread and salt for earth.
   The Eucharist of "five" has for basis wine for taste, a
rose for smell, a flame for sight, a bell for sound, and a
dagger for touch.  This sacrament is implied in the Mass of
the Phoenix in a slightly different form.  {180}
   The Eucharist of "six" elements has Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit above; breath, water, and blood beneath.  It is a
sacrament reserved for high initiates.<<The Lance and the
Graal are firstly dedicated to the Holy Spirit of Life, in
Silence.  The Bread and Wine are then fermented and
manifested by vibration, and received by the Virgin Mother.
The elements are then intermingled and consumed after the
Epiphany of Iacchus, when "Countenance beholdeth
Countenance).>>
   The Eucharist of "seven" elements is mystically identical
with that of one.
   Of the method of consecrating the elements it is only
necessary to say that they should be treated as talismans.
The circle and other furniture of the Temple should receive
the usual benefit of the banishings and consecrations.  The
Oath should be taken and the Invocations made.  When the
divine force manifests in the elements, they should be
solemnly consumed.  There is also a simpler method of
consecration reserved for initiates of high rank, of which
it is here unlawful to speak.
 According to the nature of the Sacrament, so will its
results be.  In some one may receive a mystic grace,
culminating in Samadhi; in others a simpler and more
material benefit may be obtained.
   The highest sacrament, that of One element, is universal
in its operation; according to the declared purpose of the
work so will the result be.  It is a universal Key of all
Magick.
   These secrets are of supreme practical importance, and
are guarded in the Sanctuary with a two-edged sword flaming
every way<<J.K.Husmans, who was afraid of them, and tried to
betray the little he knew of them, became a Papist, and died
of cancer of the tongue.>>; for this sacrament is the Tree
of Life itself, and whoso partaketh of the fruit thereof
shall never die<<The use of the Elixir of Life is only
justifiable in peculiar circumstances.  To go counter to the
course of natural Change is to approximate perilously to the
error of the "Black Brothers".>>.
 Unless he so will.  Who would not rather work through
incarnation; a real renewal of body and brain, than content
himself with a stagnant immortality upon this mote in the
Sunlight of the Universe which we call earth?  {181}
 With regard to the preparations for such Sacraments, the
Catholic Church has maintained well enough the traditions of
the true Gnostic Church in whose keeping the secrets
are.<<Study, in the Roman Missal, the Canon of the Mass, and
the chapter of "defects".>>
   Chastity<<The Word Chastity is used by initiates to
signify a certain state of soul and of mind determinant of a
certain habit of body which is nowise identical with what is
commonly understood.  Chastity in the true magical sense of
the word is inconceivable to those who are not wholly
emancipated from the obsession of sex.>> is a condition;
fasting for some hours previous is a condition; an earnest
and continual aspiration is a condition.  Without these
antecedents even the Eucharist of the One and Seven is
partially --- though such is its intrinsic virtue that it
can never be wholly --- baulked of its effect.
 A Eucharist of some sort should most assuredly be
consummated daily by every magician, and he should regard it
as the main sustenance of his magical life.  It is of more
importance than any other magical ceremony, because it is a
complete circle.  The whole of the force expended is
completely re-absorbed; yet the virtue is that vast gain
represented by the abyss between Man and God.
   The magician becomes filled with God, fed upon God,
intoxicated with God.  Little by little his body will become
purified by the internal lustration of God; day by day his
mortal frame, shedding its earthly elements, will become in
very truth the Temple of the Holy Ghost.  Day by day matter
is replaced by Spirit, the human by the divine; ultimately
the change will be complete; God manifest in flesh will be
his name.
   This is the most important of all magical secrets that
ever were or are or can be.  To a Magician thus renewed the
attainment of the Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy
Guardian Angel becomes an inevitable task; every force of
his nature, unhindered, tends to that aim and goal of whose
nature neither man nor god may speak, for that it is
infinitely beyond speech or thought or {182} ecstasy or
silence.  Samadhi and Nibbana are but its shadows cast upon
the universe.

                               II

   If the Master Therion effects by this book nothing else
but to demonstrate the continuity of nature and the
uniformity of Law, He will feel that His work has not been
wasted.  In his original design of Part III he did not
contemplate any allusion to alchemy.  It has somehow been
taken for granted that this subject is entirely foreign to
regular Magick, both in scope and method.  It will be the
main object of the following description to establish it as
essentially a branch of the subject, and to show that it may
be considered simply as a particular case of the general
proposition --- differing from evocatory and talismanic
Magick only in the values which are represented by the
unknown quantities in the pantomorphous equations.
   There is no need to make any systematized attempt to
decipher the jargon of Hermetic treatises.  We need not
enter upon an historical discussion.  Let it suffice to say
that the word alchemy is an Arabic term consisting of the
article "al" and the adjective "khemi" which means "that
which pertains to Egypt"<<This etymology differs from that
given by Skeat; I can do no more than present my
submission.>>.  A rough translation would be "The Egyptian
matter".  The assumption is that the Mohammedan grammarians
held traditionally that the art was derived from that wisdom
of the Egyptians which was the boast of Moses, Plato, and
Pythagoras, and the source of their illumination.
   Modern research (by profane scholars) leaves it still
doubtful as to whether Alchemical treatises should be
classified as mystical, magical, medical, or chemical.  The
most reasonable opinion is that all these objects formed the
pre-occupation of the alchemists in varying proportions.
Hermes is alike the god of Wisdom, Thaumaturgy,
therapeutics, and physical science.  All these may
consequently claim the title Hermetic.  It cannot be doubted
that such writers as Fludd aspired to spiritual perfection.
It is equally sure that Edward Kelly wrote primarily from
the point of view {183} of a Magician; that Paracelesus
applied himself to the cure of disease and the prolongation
of life as the first consideration, although his greatest
achievements seem to modern thinkers to have been rather his
discoveries of opium, zinc, and hydrogen; so that we tend to
think of him as a chemist no less than we do of Van Helmont,
whose conception of gas ranks him as one of those rare
geniuses who have increased human knowledge by a
fundamentally important idea.
   The literature of Alchemy is immense.  Practically all of
it is wholly or partially unintelligible.  Its treatises,
from the "Asch Metzareph" of the Hebrews to the "Chariot of
Antimony" are deliberately couched in hieratic riddles.
Ecclesiastical persecution, and the profanation of the
secrets of power, were equally dreaded.  Worse still, from
our point of view, this motive induced writers to insert
intentionally misleading statements, the more deeply to
bedevil unworthy pretenders to their mysteries.
   We do not propose to discuss any of the actual processes.
Most readers will be already aware that the main objects of
alchemy were the Philosopher's Stone, the Medicine of
Metals, and various tinctures and elixirs possessing divers
virtues; in particular, those of healing disease, extending
the span of life, increasing human abilities, perfecting the
nature of man in every respect, conferring magical powers,
and transmuting material substances, especially metals, into
more valuable forms.
   The subject is further complicated by the fact that many
authors were unscrupulous quacks.  Ignorant of the first
elements of the art, they plagiarized without shame, and
reaped a harvest of fraudulent gain.  They took advantage of
the general ignorance, and the convention of mystery, in
just the same way as their modern successors do in the
matter of all Occult sciences.
   But despite all this, one thing is abundantly clear; all
serious writers, though they seem to speak of an infinity of
different subjects, so much so that it has proved impossible
for modern analytic research to ascertain the true nature of
any single process, were agreed on the fundamental theory on
which they based their practices.  It appears at first sight
as if hardly any two of them were in accord as to the nature
of the "First Matter of the work".  {184} They describe this
in a bewildering multiplicity of unintelligible symbols.  We
have no reason to suppose that they were all talking of the
same thing, or otherwise.  The same remarks apply to every
reagent and every process, no less than to the final product
or products.
   Yet beneath this diversity, we may perceive an obscure
identity.  They all begin with a substance in nature which
is described as existing almost everywhere, and as
universally esteemed of no value.  The alchemist is in all
cases to take this substance, and subject it to a series of
operations.  By so doing, he obtains his product.  This
product, however named or described, is always a substance
which represents the truth or perfection of the original
"First Matter"; and its qualities are invariably such as
pertain to a living being, not to an inanimate mass.  In a
word, the alchemist is to take a dead thing, impure,
valueless, and powerless, and transform it into a live
thing, active, invaluable and thaumaturgic.
   The reader of this book will surely find in this a most
striking analogy with what we have already said of the
processes of Magick.  What, by our definition, is
initiation?  The First Matter is a man, that is to say, a
perishable parasite, bred of the earth's crust, crawling
irritably upon it for a span, and at last returning to the
dirt whence he sprang.  The process of initiation consists
in removing his impurities, and finding in his true self an
immortal intelligence to whom matter is no more than the
means of manifestation.  The initiate is eternally
individual; he is ineffable, incorruptible, immune from
everything.  He possesses infinite wisdom and infinite power
in himself.  This equation is identical with that of a
talisman.  The Magician takes an idea, purifies it,
intensifies it by invoking into it the inspiration of his
soul.  It is no longer a scrawl scratched on a sheep-skin,
but a word of Truth, imperishable, mighty to prevail
throughout the sphere of its purport.  The evocation of a
spirit is precisely similar in essence.  The exorcist takes
dead material substances of a nature sympathetic to the
being whom he intends to invoke.  He banishes all impurities
therefrom, prevents all interference therewith, and proceeds
to give life to the subtle substance thus prepared by
instilling his soul.  {185}
   Once again, there is nothing in this exclusively
"magical".  Rembrandt van Ryn used to take a number of ores
and other crude objects.  From these he banished the
impurities, and consecrated them to his work, by the
preparation of canvasses, brushes, and colours.  This done,
he compelled them to take the stamp of his soul; from those
dull, valueless creatures of earth he created a vital and
powerful being of truth and beauty.  It would indeed be
surprising to anybody who has come to a clear comprehension
of nature if there were any difference in the essence of
these various formulas.  The laws of nature apply equally in
every possible circumstance.
   We are now in a position to understand what alchemy is.
We might even go further and say that even if we had never
heard of it, we know what it must be.
   Let us emphasize the fact that the final product is in
all cases a living thing.  It has been the great stumbling
block to modern research that the statements of alchemists
cannot be explained away.  From the chemical standpoint it
has seemed not "a priori" impossible that lead should be
turned into gold.  Our recent discovery of the periodicity
of the elements has made it seem likely, at least in theory,
that our apparently immutable elements should be
modifications of a single one.<<See R.K.Duncan, "The New
Knowledge", for a popularisation of recent results.
   Aleister Crowley held this doctrine in his teens at a
period when it was the grossest heresy.>>  Organic
Chemistry, with its metatheses and syntheses dependent on
the conceptions of molecules as geometrical structures has
demonstrated a praxis which gives this theory body; and the
properties of Radium have driven the Old Guard from the
redoubt which flew the flag of the essential heterogeneity
of the elements.  The doctrines of Evolution have brought
the alchemical and monistic theory of matter into line with
our conception of life; the collapse of the wall between the
animal and vegetable kingdoms has shaken that which divided
them from the mineral.
   But even though the advanced chemist might admit the
possibility of transmuting lead into gold, he could not
conceive of that {186} gold as other than metallic, of the
same order of nature as the lead from which it had been
made.  That this gold should possess the power of
multiplying itself, or of acting as a ferment upon other
substances, seemed so absurd that he felt obliged to
conclude that the alchemists who claimed these properties
for their Gold must, after all, have been referring not to
Chemistry, but to some spiritual operations whose sanctity
demanded some such symbolic veil as the cryptographic use of
the language of the laboratory.
   The MASTER THERION is sanguine that his present reduction
of all cases of the art of Magick to a single formula will
both elucidate and vindicate Alchemy, while extending
chemistry to cover all classes of Change.
   There is an obvious condition which limits our proposed
operations.  This is that, as the formula of any Work
effects the extraction and visualization of the Truth from
any "First Matter", the "Stone" or "Elixir" which results
from our labours will be the pure and perfect Individual
originally inherent in the substance chosen, and nothing
else.  The most skilful gardener cannot produce lilies from
the wild rose; his roses will always be roses, however he
have perfected the properties of this stock.
   There is here no contradiction with our previous thesis
of the ultimate unity of all substance.  It is true that
Hobbs and Nobbs are both modifications of the Pleroma.  Both
vanish in the Pleroma when they attain Samadhi.  But they
are not interchangeable to the extent that they are
individual modifications; the initiate Hobbs is not the
initiate Nobbs any more than Hobbs the haberdasher is Nobbs
of "the nail an sarspan business as he got his money by".
Our skill in producing aniline dyes does not enable us to
dispense with the original aniline, and use sugar instead.
Thus the Alchemists said: "To make gold you must take gold";
their art was to bring each substance to the perfection of
its own proper nature.
   No doubt, part of this process involved the withdrawal of
the essence of the "First Matter" within the homogeneity of
"Hyle", just as initiation insists on the annihilation of
the individual in the Impersonal Infinity of Existence to
emerge once more as a less confused and deformed Eidolon of
the Truth of Himself.  This is the guarantee that he is
uncontaminated by alien elements.  The {187} "Elixir" must
possess the activity of a "nascent" substance, just as
"nascent" hydrogen combines with arsenic (in "Marsh's test")
when the ordinary form of the gas is inert.  Again, oxygen
satisfied by sodium or diluted by nitrogen will not attack
combustible materials with the vehemence proper to the pure
gas.
   We may summarize this thesis by saying that Alchemy
includes as many possible operations as there are original
ideas inherent in nature.
   Alchemy resembles evocation in its selection of
appropriate material bases for the manifestation of the
Will; but differs from it in proceeding without
personification, or the intervention of alien planes.<<Some
alchemists may object to this statement.  I prefer to
express no final opinion on the matter.>>  It may be more
closely compared with Initiation; for the effective element
of the Product is of the essence of its own nature, and
inherent therein; the Work similarly consists in isolating
it from its accretions.
   Now just as the Aspirant, on the Threshold of Initiation,
finds himself assailed by the "complexes" which have
corrupted him, their externalization excruciating him, and
his agonized reluctance to their elimination plunging him
into such ordeals that he seems (both to himself and to
others) to have turned from a noble and upright man into an
unutterable scoundrel; so does the "First Matter" blacken
and putrefy as the Alchemist breaks up its coagulations of
impurity.
   The student may work out for himself the various
analogies involved, and discover the "Black Dragon", the
"Green Lion", the "Lunar Water", the "Raven's Head", and so
forth.  The indications above given should suffice all who
possess aptitude for Alchemical Research.
   Only one further reflection appears necessary; namely,
that the Eucharist, with which this chapter is properly
preoccupied, must be conceived as one case --- as the
critical case --- of the Art of the Alchemist.
   The reader will have observed, perhaps with surprise,
that The MASTER THERION describes several types of
Eucharist.  The reason is that given above; there is no
substance incompetent to {188} serve as an element in some
Sacrament; also, each spiritual Grace should possess its
peculiar form of Mass, and therefore its own "materia
magica".  It is utterly unscientific to treat "God" as a
universal homogeneity, and use the same means to prolong
life as to bewitch cattle.  One does not invoke
"Electricity" indiscriminately to light one's house and to
propel one's brougham; one works by measured application of
one's powers to intelligent analytical comprehension of the
conditions of each separate case.
   There is a Eucharist for every Grace that we may need; we
must apprehend the essential characters in each case, select
suitable elements, and devise proper processes.
   To consider the classical problems of Alchemy:  The
Medicine of Metals must be the quintessence of some
substance that serves to determine the structure (or rate of
vibration) whose manifestation is in characteristic metallic
qualities.  This need not be a chemical substance at all in
the ordinary sense of the word.
   The Elixir of Life will similarly consist of a living
organism capable of growth, at the expense of its
environment; and of such a nature that its "true Will" is to
cause that environment to serve it as its means of
expression in the physical world of human life.
   The Universal Medicine will be a menstruum of such
subtlety as to be able to penetrate all matter and transmute
it in the sense of its own tendency, while of such impartial
purity as to accept perfectly the impression of the Will of
the Alchemist.  This substance, properly prepared, and
properly charged, is able to perform all things soever that
are physically possible, within the limits of the
proportions of its momentum to the inertia of the object to
which it is applied.
   It may be observed in conclusion that, in dealing with
forms of Matter-Motion so subtle as these, it is not enough
to pass the Pons Asinorum of intellectual knowledge.
   The MASTER THERION has possessed the theory of these
Powers for many years; but His practice is still in progress
towards perfection.  Even efficiency in the preparation is
not all; there is need to be judicious in the manipulation,
and adroit in the administration, of the product.  He does
not perform haphazard miracles, but applies His science and
skill in conformity with the laws of nature.


{189}






                          CHAPTER XXI

                        OF BLACK MAGIC
           OF THE MAIN TYPES OF THE OPERATIONS OF MAGICK ART
                 AND OF THE POWERS OF THE SPHINX

                               I

   As was said at the opening of the second chapter, the
Single Supreme Ritual is the attainment of the Knowledge and
Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel. "It is the raising
of the complete man in a vertical straight line."
   Any deviation from this line tends to become black magic.
Any other operation is black magic.
   In the True Operation the Exaltation is equilibrated by
an expansion in the other three arms of the Cross.  Hence
the Angel immediately gives the Adept power over the Four
Great Princes and their servitors.<<See the Book of the
Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage.>>
 If the magician needs to perform any other operation than
this, it is only lawful in so far as it is a necessary
preliminary to That One Work.
 There are, however many shades of grey.  It is not every
magician who is well armed with theory.  Perhaps one such
may invoke Jupiter, with the wish to heal others of their
physical ills.  This sort of thing is harmless,<<There is
nevertheless the general objection to the diversion of
channels of Initiation to the Sea of Attainment, into
ditches of irrigation for the fields of material advantage.
It is bad business to pay good coin for perishable products;
like marrying for money, or prostituting poetic genius to
political purposes.  The converse course, though equally
objectionable as pollution of the purity of the planes, is
at least respectable for its nobility.  The ascetic of the
Thebaid or the Trappist Monastery is infinitely worthier
than the health-peddler and success-monger of Boston or Los
Angeles; for the one offers temporal trash to gain eternal
wealth, while the other values spiritual substance only as
enabling him to get better bodily conditions, and a firmer
grip on the dollars.>> or almost so.  It is not evil in
{190} itself.  It arises from a defect of understanding.
Until the Great Work has been performed, it is presumptuous
for the magician to pretend to understand the universe, and
dictate its policy.  Only the Master of the Temple can say
whether any given act is a crime. "Slay that innocent
child?"  (I hear the ignorant say)  "What a horror!" "Ah!"
replies the Knower, with foresight of history, "but that
child will become Nero.  Hasten to strangle him!"
   There is a third, above these, who understands that Nero
was as necessary as Julius Caesar.
   The Master of the Temple accordingly interferes not with
the scheme of things except just so far as he is doing the
Work which he is sent to do.  Why should he struggle against
imprisonment, banishment, death?  It is all part of the game
in which he is a pawn.  "It was necessary for the Son of Man
to suffer these things, and to enter into His glory."
   The Master of the Temple is so far from the man in whom
He manifests that all these matters are of no importance to
Him.  It may be of importance to His Work that man shall sit
upon a throne, or be hanged.  In such a case He informs his
Magus, who exerts the power intrusted to HIm, and it happens
accordingly.  Yet all happens naturally, and of necessity,
and to all appearance without a word from Him.
   Nor will the mere Master of the Temple, as a rule,
presume to act upon the Universe, save as the servant of his
own destiny.  It is only the Magus, He of the grade above,
who has attained to Chokhmah, Wisdom, and so dare act.  He
must dare act, although it like Him not.  But He must assume
the Curse of His grade, as it is written in the Book of the
Magus.<<Equinox I, VII, 5-9.>>
   There are, of course, entirely black forms of magic.  To
him who has not given every drop of his blood for the cup of
BABALON {191} all magic power is dangerous.  There are even
more debased and evil forms, things in themselves black.
Such is the use of spiritual force to material ends.
Christian Scientists, Mental Healers, Professional Diviners,
Psychics and the like, are all "ipso facto" Black Magicians.
   They exchange gold for dross.  They sell their higher
powers for gross and temporary benefit.
   That the most crass ignorance of Magick is their
principal characteristic is no excuse, even if Nature
accepted excuses, which she does not.  If you drink poison
in mistake for wine, your "mistake" will not save your life.
   Below these in one sense, yet far above them in another,
are the Brothers of the Left Hand Path<<See Liber 418, and
study it well, in this matter.  Equinox I, V,
Supplement.>>.  These are they who "shut themselves up", who
refuse their blood to the Cup, who have trampled Love in the
Race for self-aggrandisment.
   As far as the grade of Exempt Adept, they are on the same
path as the White Brotherhood; for until that grade is
attained, the goal is not disclosed.  Then only are the
goats, the lonely leaping mountain-masters, separated from
the gregarious huddling valley-bound sheep.  Then those who
have well learned the lessons of the Path are ready to be
torn asunder, to give up their own life to the Babe of the
Abyss which is --- and is not --- they.
   The others, proud in their purple, refuse.  They make
themselves a false crown of the Horror of the Abyss;  they
set the Dispersion of Choronzon upon their brows; they
clothe themselves in the poisoned robes of Form; they shut
themselves up; and when the force that made them what they
are is exhausted, their strong towers fall, they become the
Eaters of Dung in the Day of Be-with-us, and their shreds,
strewn in the Abyss, are lost.
   Not so the Masters of the Temple, that sit as piles of
dust in the City of the Pyramids, awaiting the Great Flame
that shall consume that dust to ashes.  For the blood that
they have surrendered is treasured in the Cup of OUR LADY
BABALON, a mighty {192} medicine to awake the Eld of the All-
Father, and redeem the Virgin of the World from her
virginity.

                              II

   Before leaving the subject of Black Magic, one may touch
lightly on the question of Pacts with the Devil.
   The Devil does not exist.  It is a false name invented by
the Black Brothers to imply a Unity in their ignorant muddle
of dispersions.  A devil who had unity would be a God<<"The
Devil" is, historically, the God of any people that one
personally dislikes.  This has led to so much confusion of
thought that THE BEAST 666 has preferred to let names stand
as they are, and to proclaim simply that AIWAZ --- the solar-
phallic-hermetic "Lucifer" is His own Holy Guardian Angel,
and "The Devil" SATAN or HADIT of our particular unit of the
Starry Universe.  This serpent, SATAN, is not the enemy of
Man, but He who made Gods of our race, knowing Good and
Evil; He bade "Know Thyself!" and taught Initiation.  He is
"the Devil" of the Book of Thoth, and His emblem is
BAPHOMET, the Androgyne who is the hieroglyph of arcane
perfection.  The number of His Atu is XV, which is Yod He,
the Monogram of the Eternal, the Father one with the Mother,
the Virgin Seed one with all-containing Space.  He is
therefore Life, and Love.  But moreover his letter is Ayin,
the Eye; he is Light, and his Zodiacal image is Capricornus,
that leaping goat whose attribute is Liberty.  (Note that
the "Jehovah" of the Hebrews is etymologically connected
with these.  The classical example of such antinomy, one
which has led to such disastrous misunderstandings, is that
between NU and HAD, North and South, Jesus and John.  The
subject is too abstruse and complicated to be discussed in
detail here.  The student should consult the writings of Sir
R. Payne Knight, General Forlong, Gerald Massey, Fabre
d'Olivet; etc. etc., for the data on which these
considerations are ultimately based.)>>.
   It was said by the Sorcerer of the Jura that in order to
invoke the Devil it is only necessary to call him with your
whole will.
   This is an universal magical truth, and applies to every
other being as much as to the Devil.  For the whole will of
every man is in reality the whole will of the Universe.
   It is, however, always easy to call up the demons, for
they are always calling you; and you have only to step down
to their level {193} and fraternize with them.  They will
tear you in pieces at their leisure.  Not at once; they will
wait until you have wholly broken the link between you and
your Holy Guardian Angel before they pounce, lest at the
last moment you escape.
   Anthony of Padua and (in our own times) "Macgregor"
Mathers are examples of such victims.
 Nevertheless, every magician must firmly extend his empire
to the depth of hell.  "My adepts stand upright, their heads
above the heavens, their feet below the hells."<<Liber XC,
verse 40.  See The Equinox.>>
   This is the reason why the magician who performs the
Operation of the "Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage",
immediately after attaining to the Knowledge and
Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel, must evoke the Four
Great Princes of the Evil of the World.
   "Obedience and faith to Him that liveth and triumpheth,
that reigneth above you in your palaces as the Balance of
Righteousness and Truth" is your duty to your Holy Guardian
Angel, and the duty of the demon world to you.
   These powers of "evil" nature are wild beasts; they must
be tamed, trained to the saddle and the bridle; they will
bear you well.  There is nothing useless in the Universe: do
not wrap up your Talent in a napkin, because it is only
"dirty money"!
   With regard to Pacts, they are rarely lawful.  There
should be no bargain struck.  Magick is not a trade, and no
hucksters need apply.  Master everything, but give
generously to your servants, once they have unconditionally
submitted.
   There is also the questions of alliances with various
Powers.  These again are hardly ever
allowable.<<Notwithstanding, there exist certain bodies of
spiritual beings, in whose ranks are not only angelic
forces, but elementals, and even daemons, who have attained
to such Right Understanding of the Universe that they have
banded themselves together with the object of becoming
Microcosms, and realize that their best means to this end is
devotion to the service of the true interests of Mankind.
Societies of spiritual forces, organized on these lines,
dispose of enormous resources.  The Magician who is himself
sworn to the service of humanity may count upon the
heartiest help of these Orders.  Their sincerity may always
be assured by putting them to the test of the acceptance of
the Law of Thelema.  Whoso denies "Do what thou wilt shall
be the whole of the Law" confesses that he still clings to
the conflict in his own nature; he is not, and does not want
to be, true to himself.  "A fortiori", he will prove false
to you.>>  No Power which is not {194} a microcosm in itself
--- and even archangels reach rarely to this centre of
balance --- is fit to treat on an equality with Man.  The
proper study of mankind is God; with Him is his business;
and with Him alone.  Some magicians have hired legions of
spirits for some special purpose; but it has always proved a
serious mistake.  The whole idea of exchange is foreign to
magick.  The dignity of the magician forbids compacts.  "The
Earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof".

                              III

 The operations of Magick art are difficult to classify, as
they merge into each other, owing to the essential unity of
their method and result.  We may mention:

   1.  Operations such as evocation, in which a live spirit
is brought from dead matter.

   2.  Consecrations of talismans in which a live spirit is
bound into "dead" matter and vivifies the same.

   3.  Works of divination, in which a live spirit is made
to control operations of the hand or brain of the Magician.
Such works are accordingly most dangerous, to be used only
by advanced magicians, and then with great care.

   4.  Works of fascination, such as operations of
invisibility, and transformations of the apparent form of
the person or thing concerned.  This consists almost
altogether in distracting the attention, or disturbing the
judgment, of the person whom it is wished to deceive.  There
are, however, "real" transformations of the adept himself
which are very useful.  See the Book of the Dead for
methods.  The assumption of God-Forms can be carried to the
point of actual transformation.

   5.  Works of Love and Hate, which are also performed (as
{195} a rule) by fascination.  These works are too easy; and
rarely useful.  They have a nasty trick of recoiling on the
magician.

   6.  Works of destruction, which may be done in many
different ways.  One may fascinate and bend to one's will a
person who has of his own right the power to destroy.  One
may employ spirits or talismans.  The more powerful
magicians of the last few centuries have employed books.
   In private matters these works are very easy, if they be
necessary.  An adept known to The MASTER THERION once found
it necessary to slay a Circe who was bewitching brethren.
He merely walked to the door of her room, and drew an Astral
T ("traditore", and the symbol of Saturn) with an astral
dagger.  Within 48 hours she shot herself.<<As explained
above, in another connexion, he who "destroys" any being
must accept it, with all the responsibilities attached, as
part of himself.  The Adept here in question was therefore
obliged to incorporate the elemental spirit of the girl ---
she was not human, the sheath of a Star, but an advanced
planetary daemon, whose rash ambition had captured a body
beyond its capacity to conduct --- in his own magical
vehicle.  He thereby pledged himself to subordinate all the
sudden accession of qualities --- passionate, capricious,
impulsive, irrational, selfish, short-sightedness, sensual,
fickle, crazy, and desperate, to his True Will; to
discipline, co-ordinate and employ them in the Great Work,
under the penalty of being torn asunder by the wild horses
which he had bound fast to his own body by the act of
"destroying" their independent consciousness and control of
their chosen vehicle.  See His Magical Record An XX, Sun in
Libra and onward.>>

   7.  Works of creation and dissolution, and the higher
invocations.
   There are also hundreds of other operations;<<Examples of
Rituals for several such purposes are given in the
Equinox.>> to bring wanted objects --- gold, books, women
and the like; to open locked doors, to discover treasure; to
swim under water; to have armed men at command --- etc.,
etc.  All these are really matters of detail; the Adeptus
Major will easily understand how to perform them if
necessary.<<Moral: become an Adeptus Major!>> {196}
 It should be added that all these things happen
"naturally".<<The value of the evidence that your operations
have influenced the course of events is only to be assessed
by the application of the Laws of probability.  The MASTER
THERION would not accept any one single case as conclusive,
however improbable it might be.  A man might make a correct
guess at one chance in ten million, no less than at one in
three.  If one pick up a pebble, the chance was infinitely
great against that particular pebble; yet whichever one was
chosen, the same chance "came off".  It requires a series of
events antecedently unlikely to deduce that design is a
work, that the observed changes are causally, not casually,
produced.  The prediction of events is further evidence that
they are effected by will.  Thus, any man may fluke a ten
shot at billiard, or even make a break of a few strokes.
But chance cannot account for consistent success, even if
moderate, when it extends over a long period of time.  And
the ability of the expert to "name his shot" manifests a
knowledge of the relations of cause and effect which
confirms the testimony of his empirical skill that his
success is not chance and coincidence.>>  Perform an
operation to bring gold --- your rich uncle dies and leaves
you his money; books --- you see the book wanted in a
catalogue that very day, although you have advertised in
vain for a year; woman --- but if you have made the spirits
bring you enough gold, this operation will become
unnecessary.<<This cynical statement is an absurdity of
Black Magic.>>
   It must further be remarked that it is absolute Black
Magic to use any of these powers if the object can possibly
be otherwise attained.  If your child is drowning, you must
jump and try to save him; it won't do to invoke the Undines.
   Nor is it lawful in all circumstances to invoke those
Undines even where the case is hopeless; maybe it is
necessary to you and to the child that it should die.  An
Exempt Adept on the right road will make no error here ---
an Adept Major is only too likely to do so.  A through
apprehension of this book will arm adepts of every grade
against all the more serious blunders incidental to their
unfortunate positions.

                              IV

   Necromancy is of sufficient importance to demand a
section to itself.
   It is justifiable in some exceptional cases.  Suppose the
magician fail to obtain access to living Teachers, or should
he need some {197} especial piece of knowledge which he has
reason to believe died with some teacher of the past, it may
be useful to evoke the "shade" of such a one, or read the
"Akasic record" of his mind.<<The only minds likely to be
useful to the Magician belong to Adepts sworn to suffer
reincarnation at short intervals, and the best elements of
such minds are bound up in the "Unconscious Self" of the
Adept, not left to wander idly about the Astral Plane.  It
will thus be more profitable to try to get into touch with
the "Dead Teacher" in his present avatar.  Moreover, Adepts
are at pains to record their teaching in books, monuments,
or pictures, and to appoint spiritual guardians to preserve
such heirlooms throughout the generations.  Whenever these
are destroyed or lost, the reason usually is that the Adept
himself judges that their usefulness is over, and withdraws
the forces which protected them.  The student is therefore
advised to acquiesce; the sources of information available
for him are probably selected by the Wardens of Mankind with
a view to his real necessities.  One must learn to trust
one's Holy Guardian Angel to shape one's circumstances with
skill.  If one be but absorbed in the ardour of one's
aspiration toward Him, short indeed is the time before
Experience instils the certain conviction that His works and
His ways are infinitely apt to one's needs.>>
   If this be done it must be done properly very much on the
lines of the evocation of Apollonius of Tyana, which Eliphas
Levi performed.<<See Rituel et Dogme de la Haute Magie;
Rituel, ch. XIII.>>
  The utmost care must be taken to prevent personation of
the "shade".  It is of course easy, but can rarely be
advisable, to evoke the shade of a suicide, or of one
violently slain or suddenly dead.  Of what use is such an
operation, save to gratify curiosity or vanity?
 One must add a word on spiritism, which is a sort of
indiscriminate necromancy --- one might prefer the word
necrophilia --- by amateurs.  They make themselves perfectly
passive, and, so far from employing any methods of
protection, deliberately invite all and sundry spirits,
demons, shells of the dead, all the excrement and filth of
earth and hell, to squirt their slime over them.  This
invitation is readily accepted, unless a clean man be
present with an aura good enough to frighten these foul
denizens of the pit.
   No spiritualistic manifestation has ever taken place in
the {198} presence even of FRATER PERDURABO; how much less
in that of The MASTER THERION!<<Even the earliest
Initiations confer protection.  Compare the fear felt by D.
D. Home for Eliphas Levi.  See Equinox I, X, "The Key of the
Mysteries".>>
   Of all the creatures He ever met, the most prominent of
English spiritists (a journalist and pacifist of more than
European fame) had the filthiest mind and the foulest mouth.
He would break off any conversation to tell a stupid smutty
story, and could hardly conceive of any society assembling
for any other purpose than "phallic orgies", whatever they
may be.  Utterly incapable of keeping to a subject, he would
drag the conversation down again and again to the sole
subject of which he really thought --- sex and sex-
perversions and sex and sex and sex and sex again.
   This was the plain result of his spiritism.  All
spiritists are more or less similarly afflicted.  They feel
dirty even across the street; their auras are ragged, muddy
and malodorous; they ooze the slime of putrefying corpses.
   No spiritist, once he is wholly enmeshed in
sentimentality and Freudian fear-phantasms, is capable of
concentrated thought, of persistent will, or of moral
character.  Devoid of every spark of the divine light which
was his birthright, a prey before death to the ghastly
tenants of the grave, the wretch, like the mesmerized and
living corpse of Poe's Monsieur Valdemar, is a "nearly
liquid mass of loathsome, of detestable putrescence."
   The student of this Holy Magick is most earnestly warned
against frequenting their seances, or even admitting them to
his presence.
   They are contagious as Syphilis, and more deadly and
disgusting.  Unless your aura is strong enough to inhibit
any manifestation of the loathly larvae that have taken up
their habitation in them, shun them as you need not mere
lepers!<<It occurs in certain rare cases that a very unusual
degree of personal purity combined with integrity and force
of character provides even the ignorant with a certain
natural defence, and attracts into his aura only intelligent
and beneficent entities.  Such persons may perhaps practise
spiritualism without obvious bad results, and even with good
results, within limits.  But such exceptions in no wise
invalidate the general rule, or in any way serve as argument
against the magical theory outlined above with such mild
suasion.>> {199}


                               V

  Of the powers of the Sphinx much has been written.<<In
Liber CXI (Aleph) the subject is treated with profound and
all-comprehensive wisdom.>>  Wisely they have been kept in
the forefront of true magical instruction.  Even the tyro
can always rattle off that he has to know, to dare to will
and to keep silence.  It is difficult to write on this
subject, for these powers are indeed comprehensive, and the
interplay of one with the other becomes increasingly evident
as one goes more deeply into the subject.
   But there is one general principle which seems worthy of
special emphasis in this place.  These four powers are thus
complex because they are the powers of the Sphinx, that is,
they are functions of a single organism.
   Now those who understand the growth of organisms are
aware that evolution depends on adaptation to environment.
If an animal which cannot swim is occasionally thrown into
water, it may escape by some piece of good fortune, but if
it is thrown into water continuously it will drown sooner or
later, unless it learns to swim.
   Organisms being to a certain extent elastic, they soon
adapt themselves to a new environment, provided that the
change is not so sudden as to destroy that elasticity.
 Now a change in environment involves a repeated meeting of
new conditions, and if you want to adapt yourself to any
given set of conditions, the best thing you can do is to
place yourself cautiously and persistently among them.  That
is the foundation of all education.
   The old-fashioned pedagogues were not all so stupid as
some modern educators would have us think.  The principle of
the system was to strike the brain a series of constantly
repeated blows until the proper reaction became normal to
the organism.
   It is not desirable to use ideas which excite interest,
or may come {200} in handy later as weapons, in this
fundamental training of the mind.  It is much better to
compel the mind to busy itself with root ideas which do not
mean very much to the child, because you are not trying to
excite the brain, but to drill it.  For this reason, all the
best minds have been trained by preliminary study of
classics and mathematics.
   The same principle applies to the training of the body.
The original exercises should be of a character to train the
muscles generally to perform any kind of work, rather than
to train them for some special kind of work, concentration
of which will unfit them for other tasks by depriving them
of the elasticity which is the proper condition of
life.<<Some few forms of exercise are exempt from these
strictures.  Rock-climbing, in particular, trains every
muscle in an endless variety of ways.  It moreover compels
the learner to use his own judgment, to rely on himself, to
develop resource, and to depend upon his own originality to
attack each new problem that presents itself.  This
principle may be extended to all departments of the
education of children.  They should be put into contact with
all kinds of truth, and allowed to make their own
reflections thereon and reactions thereto, without the least
attempt to bias their judgment.  Magical pupils should be
trained on similar lines.  They should be made to work alone
from the first, to cover the whole ground impartially, to
devise their own experiments and draw their own
conclusions.>>
   In Magick and meditation this principle applies with
tremendous force.  It is quite useless to teach people how
to perform magical operations, when it may be that such
operations, when they have learned to do them, are not in
accordance with their wills.  What must be done is to drill
the Aspirant in the hard routine of the elements of the
Royal Art.
   So far as mysticism is concerned, the technique is
extremely simple, and has been very simply described in Part
I of this Book 4.  It cannot be said too strongly that any
amount of mystical success whatever is no compensation for
slackness with regard to the technique.  There may come a
time when Samadhi itself is no part of the business of the
mystic.  But the character developed by the original
training remains an asset.  In other words, the person who
has made himself a first-class brain capable of elasticity
is competent to {201} attack any problem soever, when he who
has merely specialized has got into a groove, and can no
longer adapt and adjust himself to new conditions.
   The principle is quite universal.  You do not train a
violinist to play the Beethoven Concerto; you train him to
play every conceivable consecution of notes with perfect
ease, and you keep him at the most monotonous drill possible
for years and years before you allow him to go on the
platform.  You make of him an instrument perfectly able to
adjust itself to any musical problem that may be set before
him.  This technique of Yoga is the most important detail of
all our work.  The MASTER THERION has been himself somewhat
to blame in representing this technique as of value simply
because it leads to the great rewards, such as Samadhi.  He
would have been wiser to base His teaching solely on the
ground of evolution.  But probably He thought of the words
of the poet:
        "You dangle a carrot in front of her nose,
        And she goes wherever the carrot goes."
For, after all, one cannot explain the necessity of the
study of Latin either to imbecile children or to stupid
educationalists; for, not having learned Latin, they have
not developed the brains to learn anything.
   The Hindus, understanding these difficulties, have taken
the God-Almighty attitude about the matter.  If you go to a
Hindu teacher, he treats you as less than an earthworm.  You
have to do this, and you have to do that, and you are not
allowed to know why you are doing it.<<This does not
conflict with the "go-as-you-please" plan put forward in the
previous note.  An autocratic Adept is indeed a blessing to
the disciple, not because he is able to guide the pupil
"aright" in the particular path which happens to suit his
personality, but because he can compel the beginner to grind
away at the weariest work and thus acquire all-round
ability, and prevent him from picking out the plums which
please him from the Pie of Knowledge, and making himself
sick of a surfeit of sweets to the neglect of a balanced
diet of wholesome nourishment.>>
   After years of experience in teaching, The MASTER THERION
is not altogether convinced that this is not the right
attitude.  {202} When people begin to argue about things
instead of doing them, they become absolutely impossible.
Their minds begin to work about it and about, and they come
out by the same door as in they went.  They remain brutish,
voluble, and uncomprehending.
   The technique of Magick is just as important as that of
mysticism, but here we have a very much more difficult
problem, because the original unit of Magick, the Body of
Light, is already something unfamiliar to the ordinary
person.  Nevertheless, this body must be developed and
trained with exactly the same rigid discipline as the brain
in the case of mysticism.  The essence of the technique of
Magick is the development of the body of Light, which must
be extended to include all members of the organism, and
indeed of the cosmos.
 The most important drill practices are:
   1.  The fortification of the Body of Light by the
constant use of rituals, by the assumption of god-forms, and
by the right use of the Eucharist.
   2.  The purification and consecration and exaltation of
that Body by the use of rituals of invocation.
   3.  The education of that Body by experience.  It must
learn to travel on every plane; to break down every obstacle
which may confront it.  This experience must be as
systematic and regular as possible; for it is of no use
merely to travel to the spheres of Jupiter and Venus, or
even to explore the 30 Aethyrs, neglecting unattractive
meridians.<<The Aspirant should remember that he is a
Microcosm.  "Universus sum et Nihil universi a me alienum
puto" should be his motto.  He should make it his daily
practice to travel on the Astral Plane, taking in turn each
of the most synthetic sections, the Sephiroth and the Paths.
These being thoroughly understood, and an Angel in each
pledged to guard or to guide him at need, he should start on
a new series of expeditions to explore the subordinate
sections of each.  He may then practice Rising on the Planes
from these spheres, one after the other in rotation.  When
he is thoroughly conversant with the various methods of
meeting unexpected emergencies, he may proceed to
investigate the regions of the Qliphoth and the Demonic
Forces.  It should be his aim to obtain a comprehensive
knowledge of the entire Astral Plane, with impartial love of
truth for its own sake; just as a child learns the geography
of the whole planet, though he may have no intention of ever
leaving his native land.>>  {203}
   The object is to possess a Body which is capable of doing
easily any particular task that may lie before it.  There
must be no selection of special experience which appeals to
one's immediate desire.  One must go steadily through all
possible pylons.
   FRATER PERDRABO was very unfortunate in not having
magical teachers to explain these things to Him.  He was
rather encouraged in unsystematic working.  Very fortunate,
on the other hand, was He to have found a Guru who
instructed Him in the proper principles of the technique of
Yoga, and He, having sufficient sense to recognize the
universal application of those principles, was able to some
extent to repair His original defects.  But even to this
day, despite the fact that His original inclination is much
stronger towards Magick than towards mysticism, he is much
less competent in Magick.<<Reconsideration of these remarks,
at the request of a loyal colleague, compels Him to admit
that this may not be the case,  It is true that He has been
granted all Mystical Attainment that is theoretically
possible, while His powers in Magick seem to be uneven and
imperfect.  Despite this, it may yet be that He has
compassed the Possible.  For Mystical Attainments are never
mutually exclusive; the trance of Sorrow (for example) is
not incompatible with the Beatific Vision, or the "Universal
Joke".  But in Magick any one Operation debars its performer
from accomplishing some other.  The reason of this is that
the Oath of any Work bonds the Magician once and for all to
be the principles implied therein.  See Chapter XVI Part I.
Further, it is obviously possible to reach the essence of
anything without interfering with other things which
obstruct each other.  Crosscountry journeys are often
scarcely practicable.>>  A trace of this can be seen even in
His method of combining the two divisions of our science,
for in that method He makes concentration bear the Cross of
the work.
   This is possibly an error, probably a defect, certainly
an impurity of thought, and the root of it is to be found in
His original bad discipline with regard to Magick.
   If the reader will turn to the account of his astral
journeys in the Second Number of the First Volume of the
Equinox, he will find that these experiments were quite
capricious.  Even when, in Mexico, He got the idea of
exploring the 30 Aethyrs systematically, He abandoned the
vision after only 2 Aethyrs had been investigated.  {204}
   Very different is His record after the training in 1901
e.v. had put Him in the way of discipline.<<Recent
developments have enabled Him to correct these conditions,
so that this Book (as now finally revised for the Press) may
be considered
practically free from serious defect in this particular.>>
   At the conclusion of this part of this book, one may sum
up the whole matter in these words: There is no object
whatever worthy of attainment but the regular development of
the being of the Aspirant by steady scientific work; he
should not attempt to run before he can walk; he should not
wish to go somewhere until he knows for certain whither he
wills to go.


                           ---------


{205}






                          APPENDIX I.


   The reader will find excellent classical examples of
rituals of Magick in The Equinox, Volume I, in the following
places ---

"Number I." --- The supplement contains considerations for
preparing
   a ritual of self-initiation.  The supplement is also a
perfect
   model of what a magical record should be, in respect of
the
   form.

"Number II." --- On pages 244-288 are given several rituals
of Initiation.
   Pages 302-317 give an account of certain astral visions.
   Pages 326-332 give a formula for Rising on the Planes.

"Number III." --- Pages 151-169 give details of certain
magical formulae.
   Pages 170-190 are a very perfect example --- classical,
old
   style --- of a magical ritual for the evocation of the
spirit of
   Mercury.
   Pages 190-197 --- a ritual for the consecration of a
talisman.
   A very perfect example.
   Pages 198-205 --- a very fine example of a ritual to
invoke
   the Higher Genius.
   Pages 208-233 --- Ritual of Initiation, with explanation
of the same.
   Pages 269-272 --- Ritual of obtaining the Knowledge and
Conversation of the
   Holy Guardian Angel by the formula of I.A.O.
   Pages 272-278 --- Ritual to make one's self invisible.

"Number IV." --- Pages 43-196 --- Treatise, with model
Records, of
   Mental Training appropriate to the Magician.  {207}

"Number V." --- The supplement is the most perfect account
of
   visions extant.  They explore the farthest recesses of
the
   magical universe.

"Number VI." --- the Supplement gives seven rituals of the
dramatic
   order, as described in Chapter XIX.
   Pages 29-32 --- A highly important magical ritual for
daily
   use and work.

"Number VII." --- Pages 21-27 --- Classical ritual to invoke
 Mercury; for daily use and work.
   Pages 117-157 --- Example of a dramatic ritual in modern
   style.
   Pages 229-243 --- An elaborate magical map of the
universe
   on particular principles.
   Pages 372-375 --- Example of a seasonal ritual.
   Pages 376-383 --- Ritual to invoke Horus.

"Number VIII." --- Pages 99-128 --- The conjuration of the
   elemental spirits.

"Number IX." --- Pages 117-136 --- Ritual for invoking the
spirit of  Mars.

"Number X." --- Pages 57-79 --- Modern example of a magical
   ritual in dramatic form, commemorating the return of
Spring.
   Pages 81-90 --- Fragment of ritual of a very advanced
   character.

VOL. III.

No. I. --- This volume contains an immense number of
articles of
   primary importance to every student of magick.


      The rituals of The Book of Lies and the Goetia are
also to
   be studied.  The "preliminary invocation" of the Goetia
is in
   particular recommended for daily use and work.
   Orpheus, by Aleister Crowley, contains a large number of
   magical invocations in verse.  There are also a good many
   others in other parts of his poetical works.
      The following is a complete curriculum of reading
officially
   approved by the A.'. A.'.


{208}




                   CURRICULUM OF A.'. A.'.

                           COURSE I.

                        GENERAL READING.

SECTION 1. --- Books for Serious Study:

   The Equinox.  The standard Work of Reference in all
occult matters.  The Encyclopaedia of Initiation.

   Collected Works of A. Crowley.  These works contain many
mystical and magical secrets, both stated clearly in prose,
and woven into the robe of sublimest poesy.

   The Yi King.   (S.B.E. Series, Oxford University Press.)
The "Classic of Changes"; gives the initiated Chinese system
of Magick.

   The Tao Teh King.  (S.B.E. Series.)  gives the initiated
Chinese system of Mysticism.

   Tannhauser, by A. Crowley.  An allegorical drama
concerning the Progress of the soul; the Tannhauser story
slightly remodelled.

   The Upanishads. (S.B.E. Series.)  The Classical Basis of
Vedantism, the best-known form of Hindu Mysticism.

   The Bhagavad-Gita.  A dialogue in which Krishna, the
Hindu "Christ", expounds a system of Attainment.

   The Voice of the Silence, by H. P. Blavatsky, with an
elaborate commentary by Frater O. M.

   The Goetia.  The most intelligible of the mediaeval
rituals of Evocation.  Contains also the favorite Invocation
of the Master Therion.

   The Shiva Sanhita.  A famous Hindu treatise on certain
physical practices.

   The Hathayoga Pradipika.  Similar to The Shiva Sanhita.

   Erdmann's "History of Philosophy".  A compendious account
of philosophy from the earliest times.  Most valuable as a
general education of the mind. {209}

   The Spiritual Guide of Molinos.  A simple manual of
Christian mysticism.

   The Star of the West. (Captain Fuller.)  An introduction
to the study of the Works of Aleister Crowley.

   The Dhammapada.  (S.B.E. Series, Oxford University
Press.) The best of the Buddhist classics.

   The Questions of King Milinda. (S.B.E. Series.)
Technical points of Buddhist dogma, illustrated by
dialogues.

   Varieties of Religious Experience.  (James.)  Valuable as
showing the uniformity of mystical attainment.

   Kabbala Denudata, von Rosenroth: also the Kabbalah
Unveiled, by S. L. Mathers.
   The text of the Kabalah, with commentary.  A good
elementary introduction to the subject.

 Konx om Pax.  Four invaluable treatises and a preface on
Mysticism and Magick.

   The Pistis Sophia.  An admirable introduction to the
study of Gnosticism.

   The Oracles of Zoroaster.  An invaluable collection of
precepts mystical and magical.

   The Dream of Scipio, by Cicero.  Excellent for its Vision
and its Philosophy.

   The Golden Verses of Pythagoras, by Fabre d'Olivet.  An
interesting study of the exoteric doctrines of this Master.

   The Divine Pymander, by Hermes Trismegistus.  Invaluable
as bearing on the Gnostic Philosophy.

   The Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians, reprint of Franz
Hartmann.  An invaluable compendium.

 Scrutinium Chymicum, by Michael Maier.  One of the best
treatises on alchemy.

   Science and the Infinite,  by Sidney Klein.  One of the
best essays written in recent years.

   Two Essays of the Worship of Priapus, by Richard Payne
Knight.  Invaluable to all students. {210}

   The Golden Bough, by J. G. Frazer.  The Text-Book of folk
Lore.  Invaluable to all students.

   The Age of Reason, by Thomas Paine.  Excellent, though
elementary, as a corrective to superstition.

   Rivers of Life, by General Forlong.  An invaluable text-
book of old systems of initiation.

   Three Dialogues, by Bishop Berkeley.  The Classic of
subjective idealism.

 Essays of David Hume.  The Classic of Academic Scepticism.

   First Principles, by Herbert Spencer.  The Classic of
Agnosticism.

 Prolegomena, by Emanuel Kant.  The best introduction to
Metaphysics.

 The Canon.  The best text-book of Applied Qabalah.

   The Fourth Dimension, by H. Hinton.  The text-book on
this subject.

   The Essays of Thomas Henry Huxley.  Masterpieces of
philosophy, as of prose.
   The object of this course of reading is to familiarize
the student with all that has been said by the Great Masters
in every time and country.  He should make a critical
examination of them; not so much with the idea of
discovering where truth lies, for he cannot do this except
by virtue of his own spiritual experience, but rather to
discover the essential harmony in those varied works.  He
should be on his guard against partisanship with a favourite
author.  He should familiarize himself thoroughly with the
method of mental equilibrium, endeavouring to contradict any
statement soever, although it may be apparently axiomatic.
   The general object of this course, besides that already
stated, is to assure sound education in occult matters, so
that when spiritual illumination comes it may find a well-
built temple.  Where the mind is strongly biased towards any
special theory, the result of an illumination is often to
inflame that portion of the mind which is thus
overdeveloped, with the result that the aspirant, instead of
becoming an Adept, becomes a bigot and fanatic.  {211}
   The A.'. A.'. does not offer examination in this course,
but recommends these books as the foundation of a library.

SECTION 2. --- Other books, principally fiction, of a
generally
      suggestive and helpful kind:

   Zanoni, by Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton.  Valuable for its
facts and suggestions about Mysticism.

 A Strange Story, by Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton.  Valuable for
its facts and suggestions about Magick.

   The Blossom and the Fruit, by Mabel Collins.  Valuable
for its account of the Path.

   Petronius Arbiter.  Valuable for those who have wit to
understand it.

   The Golden Ass, by Apuleius.  Valuable for those who have
wit to understand it.

   Le Comte de Gabalis.  Valuable for its hints of those
things which it mocks.

   The Rape of the Lock, by Alexander Pope.  Valuable for
its account of elementals.

 Undine, by de la Motte Fouque.  Valuable as an account of
elementals.

 Black Magic, by Marjorie Bowen.  An intensely interesting
story of sorcery.

   Le Peau de Chagrin, by Honore de Balzac.  A magnificent
magical allegory.

   Number Nineteen, by Edgar Jepson.  An excellent tale of
modern magic.

   Dracula, by Bram Stoker.  Valuable for its account of
legends concerning vampires.

   Scientific Romances, by H. Hinton.  Valuable as an
introduction to the study of the Fourth Dimension.

   Alice in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll.  Valuable to those
who understand the Qabalah.  {212}

   Alice Through the Looking Glass, by Lewis Carroll.
Valuable to those who understand the Qabalah.

   The Hunting of the Snark, by Lewis Carroll.  Valuable to
those who understand the Qabalah.

   The Arabian Nights, translated by either Sir Richard
Burton or John Payne.  Valuable as a storehouse of oriental
magick-lore.

   Morte d'Arthur, by Sir Thomas Mallory.  Valuable as a
storehouse of occidental Magick-lore.

 The Works of Francois Rabelais.  Invaluable for Wisdom.

   The Kasidah, by Sir Richard Burton.  Valuable as a
summary of philosophy.

   The Song Celestial, by Sir Edwin Arnold.  "The Bagavad-
Gita" in verse.

   The Light of Asia, by Sir Edwin Arnold.  An account of
the attainment of Gotama Buddha.

   The Rosicrucians, by Hargrave Jennings.  Valuable to
those who can read between the lines.

   The Real History of the Rosicrucians, by A. E. Waite.  A
good vulgar piece of journalism on the subject.

   The Works of Arthur Machen.  Most of these stories are of
great magical interest.

 The Writings of William O'Neill (Blake).  Invaluable to all
students.

 The Shaving of Shagpat,  by George Meredith.  An excellent
allegory.

 Lilith, by George MacDonald.  A good introduction to the
Astral.

   La-Bas, by J. K. Huysmans.  An account of the
extravagances caused by the Sin-complex.

   The Lore of Proserpine,  by Maurice Hewlett.  A
suggestive enquiry into the Hermetic Arcanum.

   En Route, by J. K. Huysmans.  An account of the follies
of Christian mysticism.

   Sidonia the Sorceress, by Wilhelm Meinhold.  {213}

   The Amber Witch, by Wilhelm Meinhold.
 These two tales are highly informative.

   Macbeth; Midsummer Night's Dream; The Tempest, by W.
Shakespeare.  Interesting for traditions treated.

   Redgauntlet, by Sir Walter Scott.  Also one or two other
novels.  Interesting for traditions treated.

   Rob Roy, by James Grant.  Interesting for traditions
treated.

   The Magician, by W. Somerset Maugham.  An amusing
hotchpot of stolen goods.

   The Bible, by various authors unknown.  The Hebrew and
Greek Originals are of Qabalistic value.  It contains also
many magical apologues, and recounts many tales of folk-lore
and magical rites.

   Kim, by Rudyard Kipling.  An admirable study of Eastern
thought and life.  Many other stories by this author are
highly suggestive and informative.

   For Mythology, as teaching Correspondences:
      Books of Fairy Tales generally.
      Oriental Classics generally.
      Sufi Poetry generally.
      Scandinavian and Teutonic Sagas generally.
      Celtic Folk-Lore generally.

   This course is of general value to the beginner.  While
it is not to be taken, in all cases, too seriously, it will
give him a general familiarity with the mystical and magical
tradition, create a deep interest in the subject, and
suggest many helpful lines of thought.
   It has been impossible to do more, in this list, than to
suggest a fairly comprehensive course of reading.

SECTION 3. --- Official publications of the A.'. A.'.

"Liber I.
 "Liber B vel Magi."
   An account of the Grade of Magus, the highest grade which
{214}
   it is ever possible to manifest in any way whatever upon
this
   plane.  Or so it is said by the Masters of the Temple.
 Equinox VII, p. 5.

"Liber II."
   The Message of the Master Therion.  Explains the Essence
   of the new law in a very simple manner.
 Equinox XI (Vol. III, No. 1), p. 39.

"Liber III.
   Liber Jugorum."
   An instruction for the control of speech, action and
thought.
      Equinox IV, p. 9 & Appendix VI of this book.

"Liber IV. ABA."
   A general account in elementary terms of magical and
mystical
   powers.
   Part. 1. "Mysticism" --- published.
         2.  "Magick" (Elementary Theory) --- published.
         3.  "Magick in Theory and Practice" (this book).
         4.  "The Law."  Not yet completed.

"Liber VI.
   Liber O vel Manus et Sagittae."
   Instructions given for elementary study of the Qabalah,
   Assumption of God forms, vibration of Divine Names, the
   Rituals of Pentagram and Hexagram, and their uses in
   protection and invocation, a method of attaining astral
visions
   so-called, and an instruction in the practice called
Rising on
   the Planes.
      Equinox II, p. 11 and appendix VI in this book.

"Liber VII.
      Liber Liberi vel Lapis Lazuli, Adumbratio Kabbalae
      Aegyptiorum."
      sub Figura VII.
      Being the Voluntary Emancipation of a certain exempt
      Adept from his Adeptship.  These are the Birth Words
of
      a Master of the Temple.  {215}
      Its 7 chapters are referred to the 7 planets in the
      following order:
      Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Sol, Mercury, Luna, Venus.

"Liber VIII."
   See CCCCXVIII.

"Liber IX.
   Liber E vel Exercitiorum."
   Instructs the aspirant in the necessity of keeping a
record.
   Suggests methods of testing physical clairvoyance.  Gives
   instruction in Asana, Pranayama and Dharana, and advises
the
   application of tests to the physical body, in order that
the
   student may thoroughly understand his own limitations.
      Equinox I, p. 25 & Appendix VI of this Book.

"Liber X."
 "Liber Porta Lucis."
   An account of the sending forth of the Master Therion by
   the A.'. A.'. and an explanation of His mission.
      Equinox VI, p. 3.

"Liber XI.
   Liber NV."
   An Instruction for attaining Nuit.
 Equinox VII, p. 11.

"Liber XIII.
   Graduum Montis Abiegni."
   An account of the task of the Aspirant
   from Probationer to Adept.
      Equinox III, p. 3.

"Liber XV.
   Ecclesiae Gnosticae Catholicae Cannon Missae."
 Represents the original and true pre-Christian
Christianity.
      Equinox XI (vol. iii, part 1) And Appendix VI of this
        book.  {216}

"Liber XVI.
   Liber Turris vel Domus Dei."
   An Instruction for attainment by the direct destruction
of
   thoughts as they arise in the mind.
      Equinox VI, p. 9.

"Liber XVII.
   Liber I.A.O."
   Gives three methods of attainment through a willed series
of
   thoughts.
      Unpublished.  It is the active form of Liber CCCLXI.

"Liber XXI.
   The Classic of Purity," by Ko Hsuen.
   A new translation from the Chinese by the Master Therion.
      Unpublished.

"Liber XXV.
   The Ritual of the Star Ruby."
   An improved form of the lesser ritual of the Pentagram,
   Liber CCCXXXIII, The Book of Lies, pp. 34 & 35.
   Also Appendix VI of this book.

"Liber XXVII.
   Liber Trigrammaton, being a book of Trigrams of the
Mutations
   of the Tao with the Yin and Yang."
   An account of the cosmic process: corresponding to the
stanzas
   of Dzyan in another system.
      Unpublished.

"Liber XXX.
 "Liber Librae."
   An elementary course of morality suitable for the average
man.
      Equinox I, p. 17.

"Liber XXXIII."
   An account of A.'. A.'. first written in the Language of
his {217}
   period by the Councillor Von Eckartshausen and now
revised
   and rewritten in the Universal Cipher.
        Equinox I, p. 4.

"Liber XXXVI.
   The Star Sapphire."
   An improved ritual of the Hexagram.  Liber CCCXXXIII
   (The Book of Lies), p.p. 46 & 7, and Appendix VI of this
   book.

"Liber XLI.
   Thien Tao."
   An Essay on Attainment by the Way of Equilibrium.
      Knox Om Pax, p. 52

"Liber XLIV"
 "The Mass of the Phoenix."
   A Ritual of the Law.
   Liber CCCXXXIII (The Book of Lies), pp. 57-7, and
   Appendix VI in this book.

"Liber XLVI."
 "The Key of the Mysteries."
   A Translation of "La Clef des Grands Mysteres", by
Eliphas
   Levi.
   Specially adapted to the task of the Attainment of Bhakta-
   Yoga.
      Equinox X, Supplement.

"Liber XLIX.
      Shi Yi Chien."
   An account of the divine perfection illustrated by the
seven-
   fold permutation of the Dyad.
      Unpublished.

"Liber LI.
      The Lost Continent."
   An account of the continent of Atlantis: the manners and
   customs, magical rites and opinions of its people,
together {218}
   with a true account of the catastrophe, so called, which
ended
   in its disappearance.
      Unpublished.

"Liber LV.
   The Chymical Jousting of Brother Perardua with the seven
   Lances that he brake."
   An account of the Magical and Mystic Path in the language
   of Alchemy.
      Equinox I, p. 88.

"Liber LVIII."
   An article on the Qabalah in Equinox V, p. 65.

"Liber LIX.
      Across the Gulf."
   A fantastic account of a previous Incarnation.  Its
principal
   interest lies in the fact that its story of the
overthrowing of
   Isis by Osiris may help the reader to understand the
meaning
   of the overthrowing of Osiris by Horus in the present
Aeon.
           Equinox VII, p. 293.

"Liber LXI.
   Liber Causae."
   Explains the actual history and origin of the present
move-
   ment.  Its statements are accurate in the ordinary sense
of
   the word.  The object of the book is to discount
Mythopeia.
      Equinox XI, p. 55.

"Liber LXIV.
   Liber Israfel," formerly called "Anubis."
   An instruction in a suitable method of preaching.
      Unpublished.

"Liber LXV.
   Liber Cordis Cincti Serpente."
   An account of the relations of the Aspirant with his Holy
   Guardian Angel.
      Equinox XI (vol. iii, part 1), p. 65.  {219}

"Liber LXVI.
 Liber Stellae Rubeae."
   A secret ritual, the Heart of IAO-OAI, delivered unto
   V.V.V.V.V. for his use in a certain matter of "Liber
Legis."
   See Liber CCCXXXIII (The Book of Lies), pp. 34-5.  Also
   Appendix VI in his book.

"Liber LXVII.
   The Sword of Song."
   A critical study of various philosophies.  An account of
   Buddhism.
   A. Crowley, Collected Works, Vol. ii, pp. 140-203.

"Liber LXXI.
   The Voice of the Silence, the Two Paths, the Seven
Portals,"
   by H. P. Blavatsky, with an elaborate commentary by
Frater
   O. M.
   Equinox III, I.  Supplement.

"Liber LXXXIII.  --- The Urn."
   This is the sequel to "The Temple of Solomon the King,"
and is
   the Diary of a Magus.  This book contains a detailed
account
   of all the experiences passed through by the Master
Therion
   in his attainment of this grade of Initiation, the
highest
   possible to any manifested Man.
      Unpublished.

"Liber LXXVIII."
   A complete treatise on the Tarot giving the correct
designs of
   the cards with their attributions and symbolic meanings
on
   all the planes.
      Part-published in Equinox VII, p.143.

"Liber LXXXI.
   The Butterfly Net."
   An account of a magical operation, particularly
concerning the
   planet Luna, written in the form of a novel.
      Published under the title "Moon-child" by the Mandrake
      Press, 41, Museum St., London, W.C.1. {220}

"Liber LXXXIV.
   Vel Chanokh."
   A brief abstraction of the Symbolic representation of the
   Universe derived by Dr. John Dee through the Scrying of
   Sir Edward Kelly.
      Part-published in Equinox VII, p. 229 & VIII, p. 99.

"Liber XC.
   Tzaddi vel Hamus Hermeticus."
   An account of Initiation, and an indication as to those
who are
   suitable for the same.
   Equinox VI, p. 17.

"Liber XCV.
   The Wake-World."
   A poetical allegory of the relations of the soul and the
Holy
   Guardian Angel.
   Knox Om Pax, p. 1.

"Liber XCVI.
   Liber Gaias."
   A Handbook of Geomancy.
   Equinox II, p. 137.

"Liber CVI.
   A Treatise on the Nature of Death, and the proper
attitude
   to be taken towards it."
   Published in "The International", New York, 1917.

"Liber CXI (Aleph).
   The Book of Wisdom or Folly."
   An extended and elaborate commentary on the Book of the
   Law, in the form of a letter from the Master Therion to
his
   magical son.  Contains some of the deepest secrets of
initiation,
   with a clear solution of many cosmic and ethical
problems.
      Unpublished.

"Liber CL.
   De Lege Libellum."  {221}
   A further explanation of the Book of the Law, with
special
   reference to the Powers and Privileges conferred by its
   acceptance.
      Equinox III, part 1, p. 99.

"Liber CLVI.
   Liber Cheth, vel Vallum Abiegni."
   A perfect account of the task of the Exempt Adept
considered
   under the symbols of a particular plane, not the
intellectual.
      Equinox VI, p. 23.

"Liber CLVII.
   The Tao Teh King."
   A new translation, with a commentary, by the Master
Therion.
        Unpublished.

"Liber CLXV.
   A Master of the Temple," Being an account of the
attainment
   of Frater Unus In Omnibus.
   The record of a man who actually attained by the system
   taught by the A.'. A.'.
      Part-published in Equinox III, I, p. 127.

"Liber CLXXV.
   Astarte vel Liber Berylli."
   An instruction in attainment by the method of devotion,
or
   Bhakta-Yogi.
      Equinox VII, p. 37.

"Liber CLXXXV.
   Liber Collegii Sancti."
   Being the tasks of the Grades and their Oaths proper to
   Liber XIII.  This is the official paper of the various
grades.
   It includes the Task and Oath of a Probationer.
      Unpublished.

"Liber CXCVII.
   The High History of Good Sir Palamedes the Saracen Knight
   and of his following of the Questing Beast."  {222}
   A poetic account of the Great Work and enumeration of
many
   obstacles.
      Equinox IV, Special Supplement.

"Liber CC.
   Resh vel Helios."
   An instruction for the adoration of the Sun four times
daily,
   with the object of composing the mind to meditation, and
of
   regularising the practices.
      Equinox VI, p. 29.

"Liber CCVI.
   Liber RU vel Spiritus."
   Full instruction in Pranayama.
      Equinox VII, p. 59.

"Liber CCVII.
   Syllabus."  An enumeration of the Official publications
of
   A.'. A.'. with a brief description of the contents of
each book.
      Equinox XI (vol. iii part 1), p. 11.
   This appendix is extracted therefrom.

"Liber CCXX (L vel Legis).
   The Book of the Law," which is the foundation of the
whole work.
   Text in Equinox X, p. 9.  Short commentary in Equinox
VII,
   p. 378.  Full commentary by the Master Therion through
   whom it was given to the world, will be published
shortly.

"Liber CCXVI.
   The Yi King."
   A new translation, with a commentary by the Master
Therion.
           Unpublished.

"Liber CCXXXI.
   Liber Arcanorum"  GR:tau-omega-nu ATU GR:tau-omicron-
upsilon TAHUTI quas
   vidit ASAR in AMENNTI sub figura CCXXXI.  Liber
Carcerorum  GR:tau-omega-nu
   QLIPHOTH cum suis Geniis.  Adduntur Sigilla et Nomina
   Eorum.  {223}
   An account of the cosmic process so far as it is
indicated by
   the Tarot Trumps.
      Equinox VII, p. 69.

"Liber CCXLII."  AHA!
   An exposition in poetic language of several of the ways
of
   attainment and the results obtained.
      Equinox III, p. 9

"Liber CCLXV.
   The Structure of the Mind."
   A Treatise on psychology from the mystic an magical stand-
   point.  Its study will help the aspirant to make a
detailed
   scientific analysis of his mind, and so learn to control
it.
      Unpublished.

"Liber CCC. Khabs am Pekht."
   A special instruction for the Promulgation of the Law.
This
   is the first and most important duty of every Aspirant of
   whatever grade.  It builds up in him the character and
Karma
   which forms the Spine of Attainment.
      Equinox III, I, p. 171

"Liber CCCXXXIII.
   The Book of Lies falsely so-called."
   Deals with many matters on all planes of the very highest
   importance.  It is an official publication for Babes of
the
   Abyss, but is recommended even to beginners as highly
   suggestive.
      Published.

"Liber CCCXXXV.  Adonis."
   An account in poetic language of the struggle of the
human
   and divine elements in the consciousness of man, giving
their
   harmony following on the victory of the latter.
      Equinox VII, p. 117.

"Liber CCCLXI.
   Liber H.H.H."  {224}
   Gives three methods of attainment through a willed series
of
   thoughts.

"Liber CCCLXV, vel CXX.
   The Preliminary Invocation of the Goetia" so-called, with
a
   complete explanation of the barbarous names of evocation
   used therein, and the secret rubric of the ritual, by the
Master
   Therion.  This is the most potent invocation extant, and
was
   used by the Master Himself in his attainment.
      See p. 265 of this book.

"Liber CD.
   Liber TAU vel Kabbalae Truium Literarum sub figura CD."
   A graphic interpretation of the Tarot on the plane of
initiation.
      Equinox VII, p. 75.

"Liber CCCCXII.
   A vel Armorum."
 An instruction for the preparation of the elemental
Instruments.
 Equinox IV, p. 15.

"Liber CCCCXVIII.
   Liber XXX AERUM vel Saeculi."
   Being of the Angels of the Thirty Aethyrs, the Vision and
the
   Voice.  Besides being the classical account of the thirty
Aethyrs
   and a model of all visions, the cries of the Angels
should be
   regarded as accurate, and the doctrine of the function of
the
   Great White Brotherhood understood as the foundation of
   the Aspiration of the Adept.  The account of the Master
of
   the Temple should in particular be taken as authentic.
       Equinox V, Special Supplement.

"Liber CDLXXIV.  Os Abysmi vel Da'ath."
   An instruction in a purely intellectual method of
entering the
   Abyss.
         Equinox VII, p. 77.

"Liber D.  Sepher Sephiroth."
   A dictionary of Hebrew words arranged according to their
{225}
   numerical value.  This is an Encyclopaedia of the Holy
   Qabalah, which is a Map of the Universe, and enables man
   to attain Perfect Understanding.
      Equinox VIII, Special Supplement.

"Liber DXXXVI.
   A complete Treatise on Astrology."
   This is the only text book on astrology composed on
scientific
   lines by classifying observed facts instead of deducting
from "a
   priori" theories.
            Unpublished.

"Liber DXXXVI."
  GR:Beta-Alpha-Tau-Rho-Alpha-Chi-Omicron-Phi-Rho-Epsilon-Nu-
Omicron-Beta-Omicron-Omicron GR:Kappa-Omicron-Sigma-Mu-
Omicron-Mu-Alpha-Chi-Iota-Alpha.
   An instruction in expansion of the field of the mind.
      Equinox X, p. 35.

"Liber DLV.  LIBER HAD."
   An instruction for attaining Hadit.
      Equinox VII, p. 83.

"Liber DCXXXIII.
   De Thaumaturgia."
   A statement of certain ethical considerations concerning
   Magick.
      Unpublished.

"Liber DCLXVI.
 The Beast."
   An account of the Magical Personality who is the Logos of
   the present Aeon.
      Unpublished.

"Liber DCCLXXVII. (777).
   Vel Prolegomena Symbolica Ad Systemam Sceptico-Mysticae
   Viae Explicandae, Fundamentum Hieroglyphicorum
sanctissimorum
   Scientae Summae."
   A complete Dictionary of the Correspondences of all
magical
   elements, reprinted with extensive additions, making it
the {226}
   only standard comprehensive book of reference ever
published.
   It is to the language of Occultism what Webster or Murray
   is to the English Language.
   The reprint with additions will shortly be published.

"Liber DCCCXI.
 Energised Enthusiasm"
   Specially adapted to the task of Attainment of Control of
the
   Body of Light, development of Intuition and Hathayoga.
          Equinox IX, p. 17.

"Liber DCCCXIII.
   vel ARARITA."
   An account of the Hexagram and the method of reducing it
   to the Unity, and Beyond.
          Unpublished.

"Liber DCCCXXXI.
   Liber IOD, formerly called VESTA."
   An instruction giving three methods of reducing the
manifold
   consciousness to the Unity.
   Adapted to facilitate the task of the Attainment of Raja-
Yoga
   and of the Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy
Guardian
   Angel.
      Equinox VII, p. 101.

"Liber DCCCXXXVII.
   The Law of Liberty." This is a further explanation of the
   Book of the Law in reference to certain Ethical problems.
      Equinox XI (vol. III, No. 1), p. 45.

"Liber DCCCLX.
   John St. John."
   The Record of the Magical Retirement of G. H. Frater O.'.
M.'.
   A model of what a magical record should be, so far as
accurate
   analysis and fullness of description are concerned.
         Equinox I, Supplement.  {227}

"Liber DCCCLXVIII.
   Liber Viarum Viae."
   A graphical account of magical powers classified under
the
   Tarot Trumps.
         Equinox VII, p. 101.

"Liber DCCCLXXXVIII."
   A complete study of the origins of Christianity.
      Unpublished.

"Liber CMXIII.
   Liber Viae Memoriae."
   Gives methods for attaining the magical memory, or memory
   of past lives, and an insight into the function of the
Aspirant
   in this present life.
      Equinox VII, p. 105.

"Liber CMXXXIV.
   The Cactus."
   An elaborate study of the psychological effects produced
by
   "Anhalonium Lewinii" (Mescal Buttons), compiled from the
   actual records of some hundreds of experiments.
      Unpublished.

"Liber DCCCCLXIII.
   The Treasure House of Images."
   A superb collection of Litanies appropriate to the Signs
of the
   Zodiac.
      Equinox III, Supplement.

"Liber MMCCMXI.
 A Note on Genesis."
   A model of Qabalistic ratiocination.  Specially adapted
to
   Gana Yoga.

"Liber MCCLXIV.
   The Greek Qabalah."
   A complete dictionary of all sacred and important words
and
   phrases given in the Books of the Gnosis and other
important
   writings both in the Greek and the Coptic.
      Unpublished.


{228}




                          APPENDIX II.

                       ONE STAR IN SIGHT.

Thy feet in mire, thine head in murk,
    O man, how piteous thy plight,
The doubts that daunt, the ills that irk,
    Thou hast nor wit nor will to fight ---
How hope in heart, or worth in work?
    No star in sight!

Thy gods proved puppets of the priest.
    "Truth?  All's relation!" science sighed.
In bondage with thy brother beast,
    Love tortured thee, as Love's hope died
And Lover's faith rotted.  Life no least
    Dim star descried.

Thy cringing carrion cowered and crawled
    To find itself a chance-cast clod
Whose Pain was purposeless; appalled
    That aimless accident thus trod
Its agony, that void skies sprawled
    On the vain sod!

All souls eternally exist,
    Each individual, ultimate,
Perfect --- each makes itself a mist
    Of mind and flesh to celebrate
With some twin mask their tender tryst
    Insatiate.  {229}

Some drunkards, doting on the dream,
    Despair that it should die, mistake
Themselves for their own shadow-scheme.
    One star can summon them to wake
To self; star-souls serene that gleam
    On life's calm lake.

That shall end never that began.
     All things endure because they are.
Do what thou wilt, for every man
     And every woman is a star.
Pan is not dead; he liveth, Pan!
    Break down the bar!

To man I come, the number of
    A man my number, Lion of Light;
I am The Beast whose Law is Love.
    Love under will, his royal right ---
Behold within, and not above,
    One star in sight!


                       ONE STAR IN SIGHT.

   A glimpse of the structure and system of the Great White
Brotherhood.

                          A.'. A.'.<<The Name of the Order
and those of its three divisions are not disclosed to the
profane.  Certain swindlers have recently stolen the
initials A.'. A.'. in order to profit by its reputation.>>.

   Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.

   1.  The Order of the Star called S. S. is, in respect of
its existence upon the Earth, an organized body of men and
women distinguished among their fellows by the qualities
here enumerated.  They exist in their own Truth, which is
both universal and unique.  {230} They move in accordance
with their own Wills, which are each unique, yet coherent
with the universal will.
   They perceive (that is, understand, know, and feel) in
love, which is both unique and universal.
   2.  The order consists of eleven grades or degrees, and
is numbered as follows: these compose three groups, the
Orders of the S. S., of the R. C., and of the G. D.
respectively.

                 "The Order of the S. S."

        Ipsissimus .................. 10 Degree = 1Square
        Magus .......................  9 Degree = 2Square
        Magister Templi .............  8 Degree = 3Square

                 "The Order of the R. C."

               (Babe of the Abyss --- the link)

        Adeptus Exemptus ............  7 Degree = 4Square
        Adeptus Major ...............  6 Degree = 5Square
        Adeptus Minor ...............  5 Degree = 6Square

                 "The Order of the G. D."

               (Dominus Liminis --- the link)

        Philosophus .................  4 Degree = 7Square
        Practicus ...................  3 Degree = 8Square
        Zelator .....................  2 Degree = 9Square
        Neophyte ....................  1 Degree = 10Square
        Probationer .................  0 Degree = 0Square

   (These figures have special meanings to the initiated and
are commonly employed to designate the grades.)

   The general characteristics and attributions of these
Grades are indicated by their correspondences on the Tree of
Life, as may be studied in detail in the Book 777.

Student. --- His business is to acquire a general
intellectual
   knowledge of all systems of attainment, as declared in
the
 prescribed books.  (See curriculum in Appendix I.)  {231}

Probationer. --- His principal business is to begin such
practices
   as he my prefer, and to write a careful record of the
same for
   one year.

Neophyte. --- Has to acquire perfect control of the Astral
Plane.

Zelator. --- His main work is to achieve complete success in
Asana
   and Pranayama.  He also begins to study the formula of
the
   Rosy Cross.

Practicus. --- Is expected to complete his intellectual
training, and
   in particular to study the Qabalah.

Philosophus. --- Is expected to complete his moral training.
He
 is tested in Devotion to the Order.

Dominus Liminis. --- Is expected to show mastery of
Pratyahara
   and Dharana.

Adeptus (without). --- is expected to perform the Great Work
   and to attain the Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy
   Guardian Angel.

Adeptus (within). --- Is admitted to the practice of the
formula
   of the Rosy Cross on entering the College of the Holy
Ghost.

Adeptus (Major). --- Obtains a general mastery of practical
   Magick, though without comprehension.

Adeptus (Exemptus). --- Completes in perfection all these
matters.
   He then either ("a") becomes a Brother of the Left
   Hand Path or, ("b") is stripped of all his attainments
and of himself
   as well, even of his Holy Guardian Angel, and becomes
   a babe of the Abyss, who, having transcended the Reason,
   does nothing but grow in the womb of its mother.  It then
 finds itself a

Magister Templi. --- (Master of the Temple): whose functions
   are fully described in Liber 418, as is this whole
initiation
 from Adeptus Exemptus.  See also "Aha!".  His principal
   business is to tend his "garden" of disciples, and to
obtain a
   perfect understanding of the Universe.  He is a Master of
   Samadhi.  {232}

Magus. --- Attains to wisdom, declares his law (See Liber I,
vel
   Magi) and is a Master of all Magick in its greatest and
   highest sense.

Ipsissimus. --- Is beyond all this and beyond all
comprehension
   of those of lower degrees.

   But of these last three Grades see some further account
in "The Temple of Solomon the King", Equinox I to X and
elsewhere.
   It should be stated that these Grades are not necessarily
attained fully, and in strict consecution, or manifested
wholly on all planes.  The subject is very difficult, and
entirely beyond the limits of this small treatise.
   We append a more detailed account.

   3.  "The Order of the S. S." is composed of those who
have crossed the Abyss; the implications of this expression
may be studied in Liber 418, the 14th, 13th, 12th, 11th,
10th, and 9th Aethyrs in particular.
   All members of the Order are in full possession of the
Formulae of Attainment, both mystical or inwardly-directed
and Magical or outwardly-directed.  They have full
experience of attainment in both these paths.
   They are all, however, bound by the original and
fundamental Oath of the Order, to devote their energy to
assisting the Progress of their Inferiors in the Order.
Those who accept the rewards of their emancipation for
themselves are no longer within the Order.
   Members of the Order are each entitled to found Orders
dependent on themselves on the lines of the R. C. and G. D.
orders, to cover types of emancipation and illumination not
contemplated by the original (or main) system.  All such
orders must, however, be constituted in harmony with the
A.'. A.'. as regards the essential principles.
   All members of the Order are in possession of the Word of
the existing Aeon, and govern themselves thereby.
   They are entitled to communicate directly with any and
every member of the Order, as they may deem fitting.
   Every active Member of the Order has destroyed all that
He is and all that he has on crossing the Abyss; but a star
is cast forth in {233} the Heavens to enlighten the Earth,
so that he may possess a vehicle wherein he may communicate
with mankind.  The quality and position of this star, and
its functions, are determined by the nature of the
incarnations transcended by him.

   4.  The Grade of Ipsissimus is not to be described fully;
but its opening is indicated in Liber I vel Magi.
 There is also an account in a certain secret document to be
published when propriety permits.  Here it is only said
this:  The Ipsissimus is wholly free from all limitations
soever, existing in the nature of all things without
discriminations of quantity or quality between them.  He has
identified Being and not-Being and Becoming, action and non-
action and tendency to action, with all other such
triplicities, not distinguishing between them in respect of
any conditions, or between any one thing and any other thing
as to whether it is with or without conditions.
   He is sworn to accept this Grade in the presence of a
witness, and to express its nature in word and deed, but to
withdraw Himself at once within the veils of his natural
manifestation as a man, and to keep silence during his human
life as to the fact of his attainment, even to the other
members of the Order.
   The Ipsissimus is pre-eminently the Master of all modes
of existence; that is, his being is entirely free from
internal or external necessity.  His work is to destroy all
tendencies to construct or to cancel such necessities.  He
is the Master of the Law of Unsubstantiality (Anatta).
   The Ipsissimus has no relation as such with any Being: He
has no will in any direction, and no Consciousness of any
kind involving duality, for in Him all is accomplished; as
it is written "beyond the Word and the Fool, yea, beyond the
Word and the Fool".

   5.  The Grade of Magus is described in Liber I vel Magi,
and there are accounts of its character in Liber 418 in the
Higher Aethyrs.
   There is also a full and precise description of the
attainment of this Grade in the Magical Record of the Beast
666.
   The essential characteristic of the Grade is that its
possessor utters a Creative Magical Word, which transforms
the planet on {234} which he lives by the installation of
new officers to preside over its initiation.  This can take
place only at an "Equinox of the Gods" at the end of an
"Aeon"; that is, when the secret formula which expresses the
Law of its action becomes outworn and useless to its further
development.
 (Thus "Suckling" is the formula of an infant: when teeth
appear it marks a new "Aeon", whose "Word" is "Eating").
   A Magus can therefore only appear as such to the world at
intervals of some centuries; accounts of historical Magi,
and their Words, are given in Liber Aleph.
   This does not mean that only one man can attain this
Grade in any one Aeon, so far as the Order is concerned.  A
man can make personal progress equivalent to that of a "Word
of an Aeon"; but he will identify himself with the current
word, and exert his will to establish it, lest he conflict
with the work of the Magus who uttered the Word of the Aeon
in which He is living.
   The Magus is pre-eminently the Master of Magick, that is,
his will is entirely free from internal diversion or
external opposition; His work is to create a new Universe in
accordance with His Will.  He is the Master of the Law of
Change (Anicca).
   To attain the Grade of Ipsissimus he must accomplish
three tasks, destroying the Three Guardians mentioned in
Liber 418, the 3rd Aethyr; Madness, and Falsehood, and
Glamour, that is, Duality in Act, Word and Thought.

   6.  The Grade of Master of the Temple is described in
Liber 418 as above indicated.  There are full accounts in
the Magical Diaries of the Beast 666, who was cast forth
into the Heaven of Jupiter, and of Omnia in Uno, Unus in
Omnibus, who was cast forth into the sphere of the Elements.
   The essential Attainment is the perfect annihilation of
that personality which limits and oppresses his true self.
   The Magister Templi is pre-eminently the Master of
Mysticism, that is, His Understanding is entirely free from
internal contradiction or external obscurity;  His word is
to comprehend the existing Universe in accordance with His
own Mind.  He is the Master of the Law of Sorrow (Dukkha).
   To attain the grade of Magus he must accomplish Three
235} Tasks;  the renunciation of His enjoyment of the
Infinite so that he may formulate Himself as the Finite; the
acquisition of the practical secrets alike of initiating and
governing His proposed new Universe and the identification
of himself with the impersonal idea of Love.  Any neophyte
of the Order (or, as some say, any person soever) possesses
the right to claim the Grade of Master of the Temple by
taking the Oath of the Grade.  It is hardly necessary to
observe that to do so is the most sublime and awful
responsibility which it is possible to assume, and an
unworthy person who does so incurs the most terrific
penalties by his presumption.

   7.  "The Order of the R. C."  The Grade of the Babe of
the Abyss is not a Grade in the proper sense, being rather a
passage between the two Orders.  Its characteristics are
wholly negative, as it is attained by the resolve of the
Adeptus Exemptus to surrender all that he has and is for
ever.  It is an annihilation of all the bonds that compose
the self or constitute the Cosmos, a resolution of all
complexities into their elements, and these thereby cease to
manifest, since things are only knowable in respect of their
relation to, and reaction on, other things.

   8.  The Grade of Adeptus Exemptus confers authority to
govern the two lower Orders of R. C. and G. D.
   The Adept must prepare and publish a thesis setting forth
His knowledge of the Universe, and his proposals for its
welfare and progress.  He will thus be known as the leader
of a school of thought.
   (Eliphas Levi's "Clef des Grands Mysteres," the works of
Swedenborg, von Eckarshausen, Robert Fludd, Paracelsus,
Newton, Bolyai, Hinton, Berkeley, Loyola, etc., etc., are
examples of such essays.)
   He will have attained all but the supreme summits of
meditation, and should be already prepared to perceive that
the only possible course for him is to devote himself
utterly to helping his fellow creatures.
   To attain the Grade of Magister Templi, he must perform
two tasks; the emancipation from thought by putting each
idea against its opposite, and refusing to prefer either;
and the consecration of {236} himself as a pure vehicle for
the influence of the order to which he aspires.
   He must then decide upon the critical adventure of our
Order; the absolute abandonment of himself and his
attainments.  He cannot remain indefinitely an Exempt Adept;
he is pushed onward by the irresistible momentum that he has
generated.
   Should he fail, by will or weakness, to make his self-
annihilation absolute, he is none the less thrust forth into
the Abyss; but instead of being received and reconstructed
in the Third Order, as a Babe in the womb of our Lady
BABALON, under the Night of Pan, to grow up to be Himself
wholly and truly as He was not previously, he remains in the
Abyss, secreting his elements round his Ego as if isolated
from the Universe, and becomes what is called a "Black
Brother".  Such a being is gradually disintegrated from lack
of nourishment and the slow but certain action of the
attraction of the rest of the Universe, despite efforts to
insulate and protect himself, and to aggrandise himself by
predatory practices.  He may indeed prosper for a while, but
in the end he must perish, especially when with a new Aeon a
new word is proclaimed which he cannot and will not hear, so
that he is handicapped by trying to use an obsolete method
of Magick, like a man with a boomerang in a battle where
every one else has a rifle.

   9.  The Grade of Adeptus Major confers Magical Powers
(strictly so-called) of the second rank.
   His work is to use these to support the authority of the
Exempt Adept his superior.  (This is not to be understood as
an obligation of personal subservience or even loyalty; but
as a necessary part of his duty to assist his inferiors.
For the authority of the Teaching and governing Adept is the
basis of all orderly work.)
   To attain the Grade of Adeptus Exemptus, he must
accomplish Three Tasks; the acquisition of absolute Self-
Reliance, working in complete isolation, yet transmitting
the word of his superior clearly, forcibly and subtly; and
the comprehension and use of the Revolution of the wheel of
force, under its three successive forms of Radiation,
Conduction and Convection (Mercury, Sulphur, Salt; or
Sattvas, Rajas, Tamas), with their corresponding natures on
{237} other planes.  Thirdly, he must exert his whole power
and authority to govern the Members of lower Grades with
balanced vigour and initiative in such a way as to allow no
dispute or complaint; he must employ to this end the formula
called "The Beast conjoined with the Woman" which
establishes a new incarnation of deity; as in the legends of
Leda, Semele, Miriam, Pasiphae, and others.  He must set up
this ideal for the orders which he rules, so that they may
possess a not too abstract rallying point suited to their
undeveloped states.

   10.  The Grade of Adeptus Minor is the main theme of the
instructions of the A.'. A.'.  It is characterised by the
Attainment of the Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy
Guardian Angel.  (See the Equinox, "The Temple of Solomon
the King;" "The Vision and the Voice" 8th Aethyr; also
"Liber Samekh", etc. etc.)  This is the essential work of
every man; none other ranks with it either for personal
progress or for power to help one's fellows.  This
unachieved, man is no more than the unhappiest and blindest
of animals.  He is conscious of his own incomprehensible
calamity, and clumsily incapable of repairing it.  Achieved,
he is no less than the co-heir of gods, a Lord of Light.  He
is conscious of his own consecrated course, and confidently
ready to run it.  The Adeptus Minor needs little help or
guidance even from his superiors in our Order.
   His work is to manifest the Beauty of the Order to the
world, in the way that his superiors enjoin, and his genius
dictates.
   To attain the Grade Adeptus Major, he must accomplish two
tasks; the equilibration of himself, especially as to his
passions, so that he has no preference for any one course of
conduct over another, and the fulfilment of every action by
its complement, so that whatever he does leaves him without
temptation to wander from the way of his True Will.
   Secondly, he must keep silence, while he nails his body
to the tree of his creative will, in the shape of that Will,
leaving his head and arms to form the symbol of Light, as if
to make oath that his every thought, word and deed should
express the Light derived from the God with which he has
identified his life, his love and his liberty --- symbolised
by his heart, his phallus, and his legs.  It {238} is
impossible to lay down precise rules by which a man may
attain to the knowledge and conversation of His Holy
Guardian Angel; for that is the particular secret of each
one of us; as secret not to be told or even divined by any
other, whatever his grade.  It is the Holy of Holies,
whereof each man is his own High Priest, and none knoweth
the Name of his brother's God, or the Rite that invokes Him.
   The Masters of the A.'. A.'. have therefore made no
attempt to institute any regular ritual for this central
Work of their Order, save the generalised instructions in
Liber 418 (the 8th Aethyr) and the detailed Canon and Rubric
of the Mass actually used with success by FRATER PERDURABO
in His attainment.  This has been written down by Himself in
Liber Samekh.  But they have published such accounts as
those in "The Temple of Solomon the King" and in "John St.
John." They have taken the only proper course; to train
aspirants to this attainment in the theory and practice of
the whole of Magick and Mysticism, so that each man may be
expert in the handling of all known weapons, and free to
choose and to use those which his own experience and
instinct dictate as proper when he essays the Great
Experiment.
   He is furthermore trained to the one habit essential to
Membership of the A.'. A.'.; he must regard all his
attainments as primarily the property of those less advanced
aspirants who are confided to his charge.
   No attainment soever is officially recognised by the A.'.
A.'. unless the immediate inferior of the person in question
has been fitted by him to take his place.
   The rule is not rigidly applied in all cases, as it would
lead to congestion, especially in the lower grades where the
need is greatest, and the conditions most confused; but it
is never relaxed in the Order of the R. C. or of the S. S.:
save only in One Case.
   There is also a rule that the Members of the A.'. A.'.
shall not know each other officially, save only each Member
his superior who introduced him and his inferior whom he has
himself introduced.
   This rule has been relaxed, and a "Grand Neophyte"
appointed to superintend all Members of the Order of the G.
D.  The real object of the rule was to prevent Members of
the same Grade {239} working together and so blurring each
other's individuality; also to prevent work developing into
social intercourse.
   The Grades of the Order of the G. D. are fully described
in Liber 185<<This book is published in the Equinox Vol. III
No. 2 ---- Addenda by WEH: No, it isn't.  Vol. III, 2 didn't
get out of printer's proofs and was not published.  The book
in question was finally published in Regardie's "Gems from
the Equinox".>>, and there is no need to amplify what is
there stated.  It must however, be carefully remarked that
in each of these preliminary Grades there are appointed
certain tasks appropriate, and that the ample accomplishment
of each and every one of these is insisted upon with the
most rigorous rigidity.<<Liber 185 need not be quoted at
length.  It is needful only to say that the Aspirant is
trained systematically and comprehensively in the various
technical practices which form the basis of Our Work.  One
may become expert in any or all of these without necessarily
making any real progress, just as a man might be first-rate
at grammar, syntax, and prosody without being able to write
a single line of good poetry, although the greatest poet in
soul is unable to express himself without the aid of those
three elements of literary composition.>>
   Members of the A.'. A.'. of whatever grade are not bound
or expected or even encouraged to work on any stated lines,
or with any special object, save as has been above set
forth.  There is however an absolute prohibition to accept
money or other material reward, directly or indirectly, in
respect of any service connected with the Order, for
personal profit or advantage.  The penalty is immediate
expulsion, with no possibility of reinstatement on any terms
soever.
   But all members must of necessity work in accordance with
the facts of Nature, just as an architect must allow of the
Law of Gravitation, or a sailor reckon with currents.
   So must all Members of the A.'. A.'. work by the Magical
Formula of the Aeon.
   They must accept the Book of the Law as the Word and the
Letter of Truth, and the sole Rule of Life.<<This is not in
contradiction with the absolute right of every person to do
his own true Will.  But any True Will is of necessity in
harmony with the facts of Existence; and to refuse to accept
the Book of the Law is to create a conflict within Nature,
as if a physicist insisted on using an incorrect formula of
mechanics as the basis of an experiment.>>  They must
acknowledge the Authority of the Beast 666 and of the
Scarlet Woman as {240} in the book it is defined, and accept
Their Will<<"Their Will" --- not, of course, their wishes as
individual human beings, but their will as officers of the
New Aeon.>> as concentrating the Will of our Whole Order.
They must accept the Crowned and Conquering Child as the
Lord of the Aeon, and exert themselves to establish His
reign upon Earth.  They must acknowledge that "The word of
the Law is  GR:Theta-Epsilon-Lambda-Eta-Mu-Alpha." and that
"Love is the law, love under will."
   Each member must make it his main work to discover for
himself his own true will, and to do it, and do nothing
else.<<It is not considered "essential to right conduct" to
be an active propagandist of the Law, and so on; it may, or
may not, be the True Will of any particular person to do so.
But since the fundamental purpose of the Order is to further
the Attainment of humanity, membership implies, by
definition, the Will to help mankind by the means best
adapted thereto.>>
   He must accept those orders in the Book of the Law that
apply to himself as being necessarily in accordance with his
own true will, and execute the same to the letter with all
the energy, courage, and ability that he can command.  This
applies especially to the work of extending the Law in the
world, wherein his proof is his own success, the witness of
his Life to the Law that hath given him light in his ways,
and liberty to pursue them.  Thus doing, he payeth his debt
to the Law that hath freed him by working its will to free
all men; and he proveth himself a true man in our Order by
willing to bring his fellows into freedom.
   By thus ordering his disposition, he will fit himself in
the best possible manner for the task of understanding and
mastering the divers technical methods prescribed by the
A.'. A.'. for Mystical and Magical attainment.
   He will thus prepare himself properly for the crisis of
his career in the Order, the attainment of the Knowledge and
Conversation of his Holy Guardian Angel.
 His Angel shall lead him anon to the summit of the Order of
the R. C. and make him ready to face the unspeakable terror
of the Abyss which lies between Manhood and Godhead; teach
him to Know that agony, to Dare that destiny, to Will that
catastrophe, {241} and to keep Silence for ever as he
accomplishes the act of annihilation.
   From the Abyss comes No Man forth, but a Star startles
the Earth, and our Order rejoices above that Abyss that the
Beast hath begotten one more Babe in the Womb of Our Lady,
His concubine, the Scarlet Woman, BABALON.
   There is not need to instruct a Babe thus born, for in
the Abyss it was purified of every poison of personality;
its ascent to the highest is assured, in its season, and it
hath no need of seasons for it is conscious that all
conditions are no more than forms of its fancy.
   Such is a brief account, adapted as far as may be to the
average aspirant to Adeptship, or Attainment, or Initiation,
or Mastership, or Union with God, or Spiritual Development,
or Mahatmaship, or Freedom, or Occult Knowledge, or whatever
he may call his inmost need of Truth, of our Order of A.'.
A.'.
   It is designed principally to awake interest in the
possibilities of human progress, and to proclaim the
principles of the A.'. A.'.
   The outline given of the several successive steps is
exact; the two crises -- the Angel and the Abyss --- are
necessary features in every career.  The other tasks are not
always accomplished in the order given here; one man, for
example, may acquire many of the qualities peculiar to the
Adeptus Major, and yet lack some of those proper to the
Practicus.<<The natural talents of individual differ very
widely.  The late Sir Richard Jebb, one of the greatest
classical scholars of modern times, was so inferior to the
average mediocrity in mathematics, that despite repeated
efforts he could not pass the "little go" at Cambridge ---
which the dullest minds can usually do.  He was so deeply
esteemed for his classics that a special "Grace" was
placeted so as to admit him to matriculation.  Similarly a
brilliant Exorcist might be an incompetent Diviner.  In such
a case the A.'. A.'. would refuse to swerve from Its system;
the Aspirant would be compelled to remain at the Barrier
until he succeeded in breaking it down, though a new
incarnation were necessary to permit him to do so.  But no
technical failure of any kind soever could necessarily
prevent him from accomplishing the Two Critical Tasks, since
the fact of his incarnation itself proves that he has taken
the Oath which entitled him to attain to the Knowledge and
Conversation of his Holy Guardian Angel, and the
annihilation of this Ego.  One might therefore be an Adeptus
Minor or even a Magister Templi, in essence, though refused
official recognition by the A.'. A.'. as a Zelator owing to
(say) a nervous defect which prevented him from acquiring a
Posture which was "steady and easy" as required by the Task
of that grade.>>  But the system here given shows {243} the
correct order of events, as they are arranged in Nature; and
in no case is it safe for a man to neglect to master any
single detail, however dreary and distasteful it may seem.
It often does so, indeed; that only insists on the necessity
of dealing with it.  The dislike and contempt for it bear
witness to a weakness and incompleteness in the nature which
disowns it; that particular gap in one's defences may admit
the enemy at the very turning-point of some battle.  Worse,
one were shamed for ever if one's inferior should happen to
ask for advice and aid on that subject and one were to fail
in service to him!  His failure --- one's own failure also!
No step, however well won for oneself, till he is ready for
his own advance!
   Every Member of the A.'. A.'. must be armed at all
points, and expert with every weapon.  The examinations in
every Grade are strict and severe; no loose or vague answers
are accepted.  In intellectual questions, the candidate must
display no less mastery of his subject than if he were
entered in the "final" for Doctor of Science or Law at a
first class University.
   In examination of physical practices, there is a
standardised test.  In Asana, for instance, the candidate
must remain motionless for a given time, his success being
gauged by poising on his head a cup filled with water to the
brim; if he spill one drop, he is rejected.
   He is tested in "the Spirit Vision" or "Astral
Journeying" by giving him a symbol unknown and
unintelligible to him, and he must interpret its nature by
means of a vision as exactly as if he had read its name and
description in the book when it was chosen.
   The power to make and "charge" talismans is tested as if
they were scientific instruments of precision, as they are.
   In the Qabalah, the candidate must discover for himself,
and prove to the examiner beyond all doubt, the properties
of a number never previously examined by any student. {243}
   In invocation the divine force must be made as manifest
and unmistakable as the effects of chloroform; in evocation,
the spirit called forth must be at least as visible and
tangible as the heaviest vapours; in divination, the answer
must be as precise as a scientific thesis, and as accurate
as an audit; in meditation, the results must read like a
specialist's report of a classical case.
   But such methods, the A.'. A.'. intends to make occult
science as systematic and scientific as chemistry; to rescue
it from the ill repute which, thanks both to the ignorant
and dishonest quacks that have prostituted its name, and to
the fanatical and narrow-minded enthusiasts that have turned
it into a fetish, has made it an object of aversion to those
very minds whose enthusiasm and integrity make them most in
need of its benefits, and most fit to obtain them.
   It is the one really important science, for it transcends
the conditions of material existence and so is not liable to
perish with the planet, and it must be studied as a science,
sceptically, with the utmost energy and patience.
   The A.'. A.'. possesses the secrets of success; it makes
no secret of its knowledge, and if its secrets are not
everywhere known and practised, it is because the abuses
connected with the name of occult science disincline
official investigators to examine the evidence at their
disposal.
   This paper has been written not only with the object of
attracting individual seekers into the way of Truth, but of
affirming the propriety of the methods of the A.'. A.'. as
the basis for the next great step in the advance of human
knowledge.
   Love is the law, love under will.

 O. M. 7 Degree= 4Square A.'. A.'.
                                      Praemonstrator of the
                                      Order of the R... C...

 Given from the Collegium ad Spiritum Sanctum, Cefalu,
Sicily, in the Seventeenth Year of the Aeon of Horus, the
Sun being in 23 Degree Virgo and the Moon in 14 Degree
Pisces.

{244}



                         APPENDIX III


   Notes on the nature of the "Astral Plane"<<On
consideration these notes have been left as they were
originally written.  In An XVII, Sol in Virgo, Soror Rhodon,
a probationer of A.'. A.'., at that time in enjoyment of the
privilege of sojourning in a certain secret Abbey of
Thelema, asked Him to add to this book an outline of the
uranography of the Astral Planes, in less technical language
than that of Liber 777.  These notes were accordingly jotted
down by Him.  To elaborate them further would have been to
make them disproportionate to the rest of this treatise.>>.

   1) What are "Astral" and "Spiritual Beings?
   Man is one: it is a case of any consciousness assuming a
sensible form.
   Microcosms and elementals.  Maybe an elemental (e.g. a
dog) has a cosmic conception in which he is a microcosm and
man incomplete.  No means of deciding same, as in case of
kinds of space.<<See Poincare, passages quoted infra.>>
   Similarly, our gross matter may appear unreal to Beings
clad in fine matter.  Thus, science thinks vulgar
perceptions "error".  We cannot perceive at all except
within our gamut; as, concentrated perfumes, which seem
malodorous, and time-hidden facts, such as the vanes of a
revolving fan, which flies can distinguish.
   "Hence:" no "a priori" reason to deny the existence of
conscious intelligences with insensible bodies.  Indeed we
know of other "orders" of mind (flies, etc., possibly
vegetables) thinking by means of non-human brain-structures.
   But the fundamental problem of Religion is this: Is there
any praeter-human Intelligence, of the same order as our
own, {245} which is not dependent on cerebral structures
consisting of matter in the vulgar sense of the word?

   2) "Matter" includes all that is movable.  Thus, electric
waves are "matter".  There is no reason to deny the
existence of Beings who perceive by other means those subtle
forces which we only perceive by our instruments.

   3) We can influence other Beings, conscious or no, as
lion-tamers, gardeners, etc., and are influenced by them, as
by storms, bacilli, etc.

   4) There is an apparent gap between our senses and their
correspondences in consciousness.  Theory needs a medium to
join matter and spirit, just as physics once needed an
"ether" to transmit and transmute vibrations.

   5) We may consider all beings as parts of ourselves, but
it is more convenient to regard them as independent.
Maximum Convenience is our cannon of "Truth".<<The passages
referred to are as follows:
   "Les axiomes geometriques ne sont donc ni des jugements
synthetiques a priori ni des faits experimentaux.  Ce sont
des conventions ...
   Des lors, que doit-on penser de cette question: La
geometrie Euclidienne est-elle vraie?
   Elle n'a aucun sens.  Autant demander si le systeme
metrique est vrai et les anciennes mesures fausses; si les
coordonnees cartesiennes sont vraies et les coordonnees
polaires fausses.  Une geometrie ne peut pas etre plus vraie
qu'une autre; elle peut seulement etre "plus commode."
   On veut dire que par selection naturelle notre esprit
s'est adapte aux conditions du monde exterieur, qu'il a
adopte la geometrie la plus avantageuse a l'espece; ou en
d'autres termes la plus commode.  Cela est conforme tout a
fait a nos conclusions; la geometrie n'est pas vraie: elle
est avantageuse."  Poincare, "La Science et l'Hypothese."
   "Nous choisirons donc ces regles non parce qu'elles sont
vraies, mais parce qu'elles sont les plus commodes, et nous
pourrions les resumer ainsi en disant:
   "La simultaneite de dex evenements, ou l'ordre de leur
succession, l'egalite de deux durees, doivent etre definies
de telle sorte que l'enonce des lois naturelles soit aussi
simple que possible.  En d'autres termes, toutes ces regles,
toutes ces definitions ne sont pas que le fruit d'un
opportunisme inconscient."  Poincare "La Valeur de la
Science."
   The Student may consult H. H. Joachim's "The Nature of
Truth", in rebuttal.  But most of these subtleties miss the
point.  Truth must be defined.  It is a name, being a noun
(nomen); and all names are human symbols of things.  Now
Truth is the power to arouse a certain reaction ("assent")
in a man, under certain conditions: ("greenness", weight,
all other qualities, are also powers).  It exists in the
object, whether latent or manifest; so experiencing both
does and does not alter the facts.  This is Solipsism,
because we can only be conscious of our own consciousness;
yet it is not Solipsism, because our consciousness tells us
that its changes are due to the impact of an external force.
Newton's First Law makes this a matter of definition.
   "What is truth?", beyond this, inquires into the nature
of this power.  It is inherent in all things, since all
possible propositions, or their contradictories, can be
affirmed as true.  Its condition is identity of form (or
structure) of the Monads involved.
   It requires a quality of mind beyond the "normal" to
appreciate 0 Degree = X, etc., directly, just as H. H.
Joachim's reasoning demands a point-of-view beyond that of
the Bushman.>>  We may thus refer {246} psychical phenomena
to the intention of "Astral" Beings, without committing
ourselves to any theory.  Coherence is the sole quality
demanded of us.

   6)  Magick enables us to receive sensible impressions of
worlds other than the "physical" universe (as generally
understood by profane science).  These worlds have their own
laws; their inhabitants are often of quasi-human
intelligence; there is a definite set of relations between
certain "ideas" of ours, and their expressions, and certain
types of phenomena. (Thus symbols, the Qabalah, etc. enable
us to communicate with whom we choose.)

   7)  "Astral" Beings possess knowledge and power of a
different kind from our own; their "universe" is presumably
of a different kind from ours, in some respects.  (Our idea
"bone" is not the same as a dog's; a short-sighted man sees
things differently to one of normal vision.)  It is more
convenient to assume the objective existence of an "Angel"
who gives us new knowledge than to allege that our
invocation has awakened a supernormal power in ourselves.
Such incidents as "Calderazzo"<<See the story, infra, about
the origin of Book 4.>> and "Jacob"<<See the story, infra,
about Amalantra.>> make this more cogent.  {247}

   8)  The Qabalah maps ourselves by means of a convention.
Every aspect of every object may thus be referred to the
Tree of Life, and evoked by using the proper keys.

   9)  Time and Space are forms by which we obtain
(distorted) images of Ideas.  Our measures of Time and
Space<<See Poincare's essay on the Nature of Space, as an
idea invented by ourselves to measure the result of, and
explain, our muscular movements.>> are crude conventions,
and differ widely for different Beings.  (Hashish shows how
the same mind may vary.)

   10) We may admit that any aspect of any object or idea
may be presented to us in a symbolic form, whose relation to
its Being is irrational. (Thus, there is no rational link
between seeing a bell struck and hearing its chime.  Our
notion of "bell" is no more than a personification of its
impressions on our senses.  And our wit and power to make a
bell "to order" imply a series of correspondences between
various orders of nature precisely analogous to Magick, when
we obtain a Vision of Beauty by the use of certain colours,
forms, sounds, etc.)

   11) "Astral" Beings may thus be defined in the same way
as "material objects"; they are the Unknown Causes of
various observed effects.  They may be of any order of
existence.  We give a physical form and name to a bell but
not to its tone, though in each case we know nothing but our
own impressions.  But we record musical sounds by a special
convention.  We may therefore call a certain set of
qualities "Ratziel", or describe an impression as
"Saturnian" without pretending to know what anything is in
itself.  All we need is to know how to cast a bell that will
please our ears, or how to evoke a "spirit" that will tell
us things that are hidden from our intellectual faculties.

   12) (a) Every object soever may be considered as
possessed of an "Astral shape", sensible to our subtle
perceptions.  This "astral shape" is to its material basis
as our human character is to our physical appearance.  We
may imagine this astral shape: e.g. we may "see" a jar of
opium as a soft seductive woman with a cruel smile, just as
we see in the face of a cunning and dishonest man the
features of some animal, such as a fox.  {248}
  (b) We may select any particular property of any object,
and give it an astral shape.  Thus, we may take the tricky
perils of a mountain, and personify them as "trolls", or the
destructive energies of the simoom, as "Jinn".
   (c) We may analyse any of these symbols, obtaining a
finer form; thus the "spirit" contains an "angel", the angel
an "archangel", etc.
  (d) We may synthesize any set of symbols, obtaining a more
general form.  Thus we may group various types of earth-
spirit as gnomes.
  (e) All these may be attributed to the Tree of Life, and
dealt with accordingly.
  (f) The Magician may prepare a sensible body for any of
these symbols, and evoke them by the proper rites.

  13) The "reality" or "objectivity" of these symbols is not
pertinent to the discussion.  The ideas of X to the 4 power
and Sq.Rt.of  subscript -1 have proved useful to the
progress of mathematical advance toward Truth; it is no odds
whether a Fourth Dimension "exists", or whether Sq.Rt.of
subscript -1 has "meaning" in the sense that Sq.Rt.of
subscript  4 has, the number of units in the side of a
square of 4 units.
   The Astral Plane --- real or imaginary --- is a danger to
anybody who takes it without the grain of salt contained in
the Wisdom of the above point of view; who violates its laws
either wilfully, carelessly, ignorantly, or by presuming
that their psychological character differentiates them from
physical laws in the narrower sense; or who abdicates his
autonomy, on the ground that the subtler nature of astral
phenomena guarantees their authority and integrity.

  (14) The variety of the general character of the "planes"
of being is indefinitely large.  But there are several main
types of symbolism corresponding to the forms of plastic
presentation established by the minds of Mankind.  Each such
"plane" has its special appearances, inhabitants, and laws -
-- special cases of the general proposition.  Notable among
these are the "Egyptian" plane, which conforms with the
ideas and methods of magick once in vogue in the Nile
valley; the "Celtic" plane, close akin to {249} "Fairyland",
with a Pagan Pantheism as its keynote, sometimes concealed
by Christian nomenclature: the "Alchemical" plane, where the
Great Work is often presented under the form of symbolically
constructed landscapes occupied by quasi-heraldic animals
and human types hieroglyphically distinguished, who carry on
the mysterious operations of the Hermetic Art.
   There are also "planes" of Parable, of Fable, and of Folk-
lore; in short, every country, creed, and literature has
given its characteristic mode of presentation to some
"plane" or other.
   But there are "planes" proper to every clairvoyant who
explores the Astral Light without prejudice; in such case,
things assume the form of his own mind, and his perception
will be clear in proportion to his personal purity.
   On the higher planes, the diversity of form, due to
grossness, tends to disappear.  Thus, the Astral Vision of
"Isis" is utterly unlike that of "Kali".  The one is of
Motherhood and Wisdom, ineffably candid, clear, and loving;
the other of Murder and madness, blood-intoxicated, lust-
befogged, and cruel.  The sole link is the Woman-symbol.
But whoso makes Samadhi on Kali obtains the self-same
Illumination as if it had been Isis; for in both cases he
attains identity with the Quintessence of the Woman-Idea,
untrammelled by the qualities with which the dwellers by the
Nile and the Ganges respectively disguised it.

   Thus, in low grades of initiation, dogmatic quarrels are
inflamed by astral experience; as when Saint John
distinguishes between the Whore BABALON and the Woman
clothed with the Sun, between the Lamb that was slain and
the Beast 666 whose deadly wound was healed; nor understands
that Satan, the Old Serpent, in the Abyss, the Lake of Fire
and Sulphur, is the Sun-Father, the vibration of Life, Lord
of Infinite Space that flames with His Consuming Energy, and
is also that throned Light whose Spirit is suffused
throughout the City of Jewels.
   Each "plane" is a veil of the one above it; the original
individual Ideas become diversified as they express their
elements.  Two men with almost identical ideas on a subject
would write two totally different treatises upon it.

  15) The general control of the Astral Plane, the ability
to find {250} one's way about it, to penetrate such
sanctuaries as are guarded from the profane, to make such
relations with its inhabitants as may avail to acquire
knowledge and power, or to command service; all this is a
question of the general Magical attainment of the student.
   He must be absolutely at ease in his Body of Light, and
have made it invulnerable.  He must be adept in assuming all
God-forms, in using all weapons, sigils, gestures, words,
and signs.  He must be familiar with the names and numbers
pertinent to the work in hand.  He must be alert, sensitive,
and ready to exert his authority; yet courteous, gracious,
patient, and sympathetic.

  16) There are two opposite methods of exploring the Astral
Plane.
  (a). One may take some actual object in Nature, and
analyse it by evoking its astral form, thus bringing it into
knowledge and under control by applying the keys of the
Qabalah and of Magick.
  (b). One may proceed by invoking the required idea, and
giving body to the same by attracting to it the
corresponding elements in Nature.

  17) Every Magician possesses an Astral Universe peculiar
to himself, just as no man's experience of the world is
coterminous with that of another.  There will be a general
agreement on the main points, of course; and so the Master
Therion is able to describe the principal properties of
these "planes", and their laws, just as he might write a
geography giving an account of the Five Continents, the
Oceans and Seas, the most notable mountains and rivers; he
could not pretend to put forth the whole knowledge that any
one peasant possesses in respect of his district.  But, to
the peasant, these petty details are precisely the most
important items in his daily life.  Likewise, the Magician
will be grateful to the Master Therion for the Compass that
guides him at night, the Map that extends his comprehension
of his country, and shows him how best he may travel afield,
the advice as to Sandals and Staff that make surer his feet,
and the Book that tells him how, splitting open his rocks
with an Hammer, he may be master of their Virgin Gold.  But
he will understand that his own {251} career on earth is his
kingdom, that even the Master Therion is no more than a
fellow man in another valley, and that he must explore and
exploit his own inheritance with his own eyes and hands.
   The Magician must not accept the Master Therion's account
of the Astral Plane, His Qabalistic discoveries, His
instructions in Magick.  They may be correct in the main for
most men; yet they cannot be wholly true for any save Him,
even as no two artists can make identical pictures of the
same subject.
   More, even in fundamentals, though these things be Truth
for all Mankind, as we carelessly say, any one particular
Magician may be the one man for whom they are false.  May
not the flag that seems red to ten thousand seem green to
some one other?  Then, every man and every woman being a
Star, that which is green to him is verily green; if he
consent to the crowd and call it red, hath he not broken the
Staff of Truth that he leaneth upon?
   Each and every man therefore that will be a Magician must
explore the Universe for himself.  This is pre-eminently the
case in the matter of the Astral Plane, because the symbols
are so sensitive.  Nothing is easier than to suggest
visions, or to fashion phantasms to suit one's ideas.  It is
obviously impossible to communicate with an independent
intelligence --- the one real object of astral research ---
if one allows one's imagination to surround one with
courtiers of one's own creation.  If one expects one's
visions to resemble those of the Master Therion, they are
only too likely to do so; and if one's respect for Him
induces one to accept such visions as authentic, one is
being false to one's soul; the visions themselves will
avenge it.  The true Guide being gone, the seer will stray
into a wilderness of terror where he is tricked and
tortured; he will invoke his idol the Master Therion, and
fashion in His image a frightful phantasm who will mock him
in his misery, until his mind stagger and fall; and, Madness
swooping upon his carrion, blast his eyes with the horror of
seeing his Master dissolve into that appalling
hallucination, the "Vision of THE DEMON CROWLEY!"
   Remember, then, always, but especially when dealing with
the Astral Plane, that man's breath stirs the Feather of
Truth.  What {252} one sees and hears is "real" in its way,
whether it be itself, or distorted by one's desires, or
created by one's personality.  There is no touchstone of
truth: the authentic Nakhiel is indistinguishable from the
image of the Magician's private idea of Nakhiel, so far as
he is concerned.  The stronger one is to create, the more
readily the Astral Light responds, and coagulates creatures
of this kind.  Not that such creation is necessarily an
error; but it is another branch of one's Work.  One cannot
obtain outside help from inside sources.  One must use
precautions similar to those recommended in the chapter of
Divination.
   The Magician may go on for a long time being fooled and
flattered by the Astrals that he has himself modified or
manufactured.  Their natural subservience to himself will
please him, poor ape!
   They will pretend to show him marvellous mysteries,
pageants of beauty and wonder unspeakably splendid; he will
incline to accept them as true, for the very reason that
they are images of himself idealized by the imagination.
   But his real progress will stop dead.  These phantasms
will prevent him from coming into contact with independent
intelligences, from whom alone he can learn anything new.
   He will become increasingly interested in himself,
imagine himself to be attaining one initiation after
another.  His Ego will expand unchecked, till he seem to
himself to have heaven at his feet.  Yet all this will be
nothing but his fool's face of Narcissus smirking up from
the pool that will drown him.
   Error of this kind on the Astral Plane --- in quite
ordinary visions with no apparent moral import --- may lead
to the most serious mischief.  Firstly, mistakes mislead; to
pollute one's view of Jupiter by permitting the influence of
Venus to distort it may end in finding oneself at odds with
Jupiter, later on, in some crisis of one's work.
   Secondly, the habit of making mistakes and leaving them
uncorrected grows upon one.  He who begins by "spelling
Jeheshua with a 'Resh'" may end by writing the name of the
Dweller on the Threshold by mistake for that of his Angel.
{253}
   Lastly, Magick is a Pyramid, built layer by layer.  The
work of the Body of Light --- with the technique of Yoga ---
is the foundation of the whole.  One's apprehension of the
Astral Plane must be accurate, for Angels, Archangels, and
Gods are derived therefrom by analysis.  One must have pure
materials if one wishes to brew pure beer.
   If one have an incomplete and incorrect view of the
universe, how can one find out its laws?
   Thus, original omission or error tends to extend to the
higher planes.  Suppose a Magician, invoking Sol, were
persuaded by a plausible spirit of Saturn that he was the
Solar Intelligence required, and bade him eschew human love
if he would attain to the Knowledge and Conversation of his
Holy Guardian Angel; and suppose that his will, and that
Angel's nature, were such that the Crux of their Formula was
Lyrical Exaltation!
   Apart from the regular tests --- made at the time --- of
the integrity of any spirit, the Magician must make a
careful record of every vision, omitting no detail; he must
then make sure that it tallies in every point with the
correspondences in Book 777 and in Liber D.  Should he find
(for instance) that, having invoked Mercury, his vision
contains names whose numbers are Martial, or elements proper
to Pisces, let him set himself most earnestly to discover
the source of error, to correct it, and to prevent its
recurrence.
   But these tests, as implied above, will not serve to
detect personation by self-suggested phantasms.  Unless
one's aura be a welter of muddled symbols beyond
recognition, the more autohypnotic the vision is, the more
smoothly it satisfies the seer's standards.  There is
nothing to puzzle him or oppose him; so he spins out his
story with careless contempt of criticism.  He can always
prove himself right; the Qabalah can always be stretched;
and Red being so nearly Orange, which is really a shade of
Yellow, and Yellow a component of Green which merges into
Blue, what harm if a Fiend in Vermilion appears instead of
an Angel in Azure?
   The true, the final test, of the Truth of one's visions
is their Value.  The most glorious experience on the Astral
plane, let it dazzle and thrill as it may, is not
necessarily in accordance with {254} the True Will of the
seer; if not, though it be never so true objectively, it is
not true for him, because not useful for him.  (Said we not
a while ago that Truth was no more than the Most Convenient
Manner of Statement?)
   It may intoxicate and exalt the Seer, it may inspire and
fortify him in every way, it may throw light upon most holy
mysteries, yet withal be no more than an interpretation of
the individual to himself, the formula not of Abraham but of
Onan.
   These plastic "Portraits of the Artist as a Young Man"
are well enough for those who have heard "Know Thyself".
They are necessary, even, to assist that analysis of one's
nature which the Probationer of A.'. A.'. is sworn to
accomplish.  But "Love is the law, love under will."   And
Our Lady Nuit is "... divided for love's sake, for the
chance of union."  These mirror-mirages are therefore not
Works of Magick, according to the Law of Thelema: the true
Magick of Horus requires the passionate union of opposites.
   Now the proof that one is in contact with an independent
entity depends on a sensation which ought to be
unmistakeable if one is in good health.  One ought not to be
liable to mistake one's own sensible impressions for
somebody else's!  It is only Man's incurable vanity that
makes the Astral "Strayed Reveller" or the mystic confuse
his own drunken babble with the voice of the Most High.
   The essence of the right sensation consists in
recognition of the reality of the other Being.  There will
be as a rule some element of hostility, even when the
reaction is sympathetic.  One's "soul-mate" (even) is not
thought of as oneself, at first contact.
  One must therefore insist that any real appearance of the
Astral Plane gives the sensation of meeting a stranger.  One
must accept it as independent, be it Archangel or Elf, and
measure one's own reaction to it.  One must learn from it,
though one despise it; and love it, however one loathe it.
   One must realize, on writing up the record, that the
meeting has effected a definite change in oneself.  One must
have known and felt something alien, and not merely tried on
a new dress.  {255}
   There must always be some slight pang of pain in a true
Astral Vision; it hurts the Self to have to admit the
existence of a not-Self; and it taxes the brain to register
a new thought.  This is true at the first touch, even when
exaltation and stimulation result from the joy of making an
agreeable contact.
   There is a deeper effect of right reaction to a strange
Self: the impact invariable tends to break up some complex
in the Seer.  The class of ideas concerned has always been
tied up, labelled, and put away.  It is now necessary to
unpack it, and rearrange its contents.  At least, the
annoyance is like that of a man who has locked and strapped
his bag for a journey, and then finds that he has forgotten
his pyjamas.  At most, it may revolutionise his ideas of the
business, like an old bachelor with settled plans of life
who meets a girl once too often.
   Any really first-class Astral Vision, even on low planes,
should therefore both instruct the Seer, and prepare him for
Initiation.  Those failing to pass this test are to be
classed as "practice".
   One last observation seems fit.  We must not assert the
"reality" or "objectivity" of an Astral Being on no better
evidence than the subjective sensation of its independent
existence.  We must insist on proof patient to all qualified
observers if we are to establish the major premiss of
Religion: that there exists a Conscious Intelligence
independent of brain and nerve as we know them.  If it have
also Power, so much the better.  But we already know of
inorganic forces; we have no evidence of inorganic conscious
Mind.
   How can the Astral Plane help us here?  It is not enough
to prove, as we easily do, the correspondences between
Invocation and Apparition<<The Master Therion's regular test
is to write the name of a Force on a card, and conceal it;
invoke that Force secretly, send His pupil on the Astral
Plane, and make him attribute his vision to some Force.  The
pupil then looks at the card; the Force he has named is that
written upon it.>>.  We must exclude concidence<<The most
famous novel of Fielding is called "Tom Jones".  It happened
that FRATER PERDURABO was staying in an hotel in London.  He
telephoned a friend named Fielding at the latter's house,
and was answered by Mr. Fielding's secretary, who said that
his employer had left the house a few minutes previously,
and could only be reached by telephoning a certain office in
the City at between 11 o'clock and a quarter past.  FRATER
PERDURABO had an appointment at 11 o'clock with a music-hall
star, the place being the entrance to a theatre.  In order
to remind himself, he made a mental note that as soon as he
saw the lady, he would raise his hand and say, before
greeting her: "Remind me that I must telephone at once to
Fielding", when he met her.  He did this, and she advanced
toward Him with the same gesture, and said in the same
breath, "Remind me that I have to telephone to Tom Jones" --
- the name of a music-hall agent employed by her.
   It will be seen that there is here no question of any
connection between the elements of the coincidence.  If a
similar occurrence had taken place in the course of
communication with an alleged spirit, it would have been
regarded as furnishing a very high degree of proof of the
existence of an independent intelligence.
   To make this clear, let me substitute the terms of the
equation.  Suppose two independent mediums, A and B, were to
receive respectively at the same moment two messages, the
first; "Ask B who wrote Hamlet", the second: "Ask A the name
of Shakespeare's most famous tragedy."  The coincidence is
here much simpler and less striking than the one recorded
above, for there is no question of arriving at the identity
by way of accidental synonyms concealing their rational
connection.  Yet most students of Occult phenomena would
admit that there was a strong presumption that a single
intelligence had deliberately devised the two messages as a
means of proving his existence.>>, telepathy<<In "The
International" of November, 1918, was published the
conconclusion of an article called "The Revival of Magick"
by the Master Therion.  The last sentence reads: "Herein is
Wisdom; let him that hath understanding count the number of
the Beast; for it is the number of a man; and his number is
six hundred and three score and six.   GR:Tau-Omicron  GR:Mu-
Epsilon-Gamma-Alpha  GR:Theta-Eta-Rho-Iota-Omicron-Nu the
Great Wild Beast, has the value, according to the Greek
system, of 666.  It is, of course, the title of the Master
Therion.
   The Master Therion was, about this time, in communication
with an intelligence who gave the name of Amalantrah.  On
Sunday, February 24, 1918, at 9.30 p. m., The Master Therion
asked Amalantrah if he could use the word  GR:Theta-Eta-Rho-
Iota-Omicron-Nu as if it were Hebrew, with the idea of
getting further information as to the mystic meaning of the
Word.  The answer was "Yes".  He then asked: "Am I to take
the word
 GR:Theta-Eta-Rho-Iota-Omicron-Nu alone, or the three words
GR:Tau-Omicron  GR:Mu-Epsilon-Gamma-Alpha  GR:Theta-Eta-Rho-
Iota-Omicron-Nu?"  The answer was to take the word  GR:Theta-
Eta-Rho-Iota-Omicron-Nu alone.  The Master Therion then
asked what Hebrew letters should be used to transliterate
the Greek.  The answer was: "Tau, Yod, Resh, Yod, Ayin,
Nun", which adds to 740 or 1390, according as Nun is given
its ordinary value of 50, or its value as the final letter
of a word, 700.  Neither of these numbers possessed any
special significance to The Master Therion.  He became very
annoyed at Amalantrah's failure to be of use; so much so
that the communications became confused, and the work had to
be abandoned for that evening.  He tried various other
Hebrew spellings for the word  GR:Theta-Eta-Rho-Iota-Omicron-
Nu, but was unable to obtain anything of interest.  This is
rather remarkable, as it is nearly always possible to get
more or less good results by trying various possibilities.
For example, the O might be equally well Ayin, Vau or Aleph.
   On Monday morning, The Master Therion went to the office
of "The International," of which he was editor.  At this
period there was a coal famine in New York, and it was
forbidden to heat office buildings on Mondays.  He merely
took away his mail and went home.  On Tuesday morning He
found on his desk a letter which had arrived on Monday for
the general editor, who had sent it across to Him for reply,
as it concerned The Master Therion rather than himself.
This letter had been written and posted on Sunday evening,
at about the same time as the communication from Amalantrah.
The letter ends as follows: "Please inform your readers that
I, Samuel bar Aiwaz bie Yackou de Sherabad, have counted the
number of the Beast, and it is the number of a man.
                 HB:Nunfinal     HB:Vau    HB:Yod   HB:Resh
HB:Taw
                               N    O   I  R   Th
  (Read from right to left)    50   6  10 200 400
                             -----------------------
                                     666

   Here, then, we see the most striking solution possible of
the problem presented to Amalantrah.  Observe that
Amalantrah had refused to give the correct solution
directly; as it would seem, in order to emphasize the
remarkable character of the intervention of this Assyrian
correspondent.  Observe, too, that the latter was totally
ignorant of the ordinary Qabalah, it being quite generally
known that  GR:Tau-Omicron  GR:Mu-Epsilon-Gamma-Alpha-Theta-
Eta-Rho-Iota-Omicron-Nu adds up to 666 in Greek.  Observe,
moreover, that nearly four months had passed since the
problem was propounded in "The International?"  The Assyrian
lived some distance outside New York, and was an entire
stranger to any of the staff of "The International."  The
evidence appears overwhelming for the existence of
Amalantrah, that he was more expert in the Qabalah than The
Master Therion himself, and that he was (further) possessed
with the power to recall this four-months-old problem to the
mind of an entirely unconnected stranger, causing him to
communicate the correct answer at the same moment as the
question was being asked many miles away.
   Coincidence, so completely adequate to explain the
Fielding-Tom Jones incident, is utterly incompetent as an
alternative theory.  The directly purposeful character of
the circumstances is undeniable; but if we are resolutely
determined to deny the possibility of the existence of
Amalantrah, which explains the whole affair so simply, we
have still one resource.  It involves difficulties which The
Master Therion cannot conceive as less than those which
encumber the other, but it is, at least, not entirely beyond
possibility.  This theory is telepathy.  One may postulate
that the solution of his problem existed in the subconscious
mind of the Master Therion or in that of His seer, and that
this solution was telepathically impressed upon the
consciousness of the Assyrian so forcibly as to impel him to
communicate it to the Master Therion's colleague on "The
International."  Apart from the general improbability of
this hypothesis, it is strange that if "Amalantrah" were
really the subconscious mind of the seer, he should have
given a wrong orthography.  His doing so (if he knew the
correct spelling) is only explicable by his wish not to take
the edge off his plan for making the Assyrian's letter a
fulminating revelation of his existence, as would have
happened if the secret had been prematurely disclosed.
   The case is here cited in order to illustrate the extreme
care which ought to be taken in excluding all alternative
hypotheses before admitting the existence of disembodied
intelligences.  It may be mentioned, however, that in this
particular case there are numerous other incidents which
make the telepathic theory untenable.>>, and subconscious
knowledge.<<There is a well-known story quoted in several
treatises of psychology in which the heroine is an ignorant
English servant girl of quite inferior intelligence, and
unacquainted with any language, even her own.  In the course
of a fever, she became delirious, and proceeded to reel off
long passages of scholarly Hebrew.  Investigations showed
that in her first youth she had been for a time in the
service of a Jewish Rabbi who had been accustomed to declaim
his sermons in the hearing of the girl.  Although attaching
no meaning to the words, she had stored them mechanically in
her subconscious memory, to be reproduced when the action of
the fever excited the group of cells where they were
recorded.>>  Our praeter-human Intelligence {256} must
convey a Truth not known to any human mind, past or present.
Yet this Truth must be verifiable.
   There is but one document in the world which presents
evidence that fully satisfies these conditions.  This is

                        LIBER AL vel LEGIS

                        the Book of the Law.

of this New Aeon of Horus, the Crowned and Conquering Child,
the Aeon whose Logos is THE BEAST 666, whose name in the
Outer Order was FRATER PERDURABO.
   The nature of the proof of the separate existence of
praeterhuman Intelligence, independent of bodily form, is
extremely complicated.  Its main divisions may be briefly
enumerated.  {257}
   AIWAZ, the name of the Intelligence in question, proves:
  (a) His power to pre-arrange events unconnected with His
scribe so that they should fit in with that scribe's private
calculations.
   E.g.  The Stele which reveals the Theogony of the Book
was officially numbered 666, in the Boulak Museum.  The
scribe had adopted 666 as His magical number, many years
previously.  Again, the scribe's magical House, bought years
earlier, had a name whose value was 418.  The scribe had
calculated 418 as the {258} number of the Great Work, in
1901 e.v.  He only discovered that 418 was the number of his
house in consequence of AIWAZ mentioning the fact.
  (b) His power to conceal a coherent system of numbers and
letters in the text of a rapidly-written document,
containing riddles and ciphers opening to a Master-Key
unknown to the scribe, yet linked with his own system; this
Key and its subordinates being moreover a comment on the
text.  {259}
   E.g. "The word of the Law is  GR:Theta-Epsilon-Lambda-Eta-
Mu-Alpha." (Will); this word has the value of 93.
   "Love is the law, love under will."  Love,  GR:Alpha-
gamma-alpha-pi-eta, like
 GR:Theta-epsilon-lambda-eta-mu-alpha, adds to 93.
   AIWAZ itself adds to 93.<<This numeration was discovered
years later.  The question then arose out of consideration
of this discovery through S. Jacobs:  "Why is Aiwaz spelt
Aiwass, not Aiwaz, in the Book of the Law?" In Greek
GR:Alpha-iota-digamma-alpha-sigma-sigma = 418.  The author
of the Book had concealed in His own name not one only but
two numbers, those of supreme importance in the Book.>>
   This was all strange to the scribe; yet years later he
discovered the "Lost Word" of one of his own Orders: it was
93 also.<<[WEH Note: This refers to the word of the IIIrd
Degree of O.T.O., readers who may wish to acquire it may
apply for initiation and work their way up through the
Degrees.  Ordo Templi Orientis, JAF Box 7666, New York, NY
10116, USA.]>>
   The Word of His most holy Order proved equally to count
up {260} to 93.<<This list by no means exhausts the series.
In particular, Frater Perdurabo discovered in 1923 that the
Hebrew word for "to will" is also of the value of 93: and
its special technical meanings throw yet further light on
the meaning of  GR:Theta-epsilon-lambda-eta-mu-alpha as used
by Aiwaz.
   {WEH NOTE:  In this instance, Crowley refers not to the
word of III Degree O.T.O., but to the Neophyte word of A.'.
A.'..>>  Now 93 is thrice 31; 31 is LA, "Not" and AL, "The"
or "God"; these words run throughout the Book, giving a
double meaning to many passages.  A third 31 is the compound
letter ShT, the two hieroglyphs of Sh and T (many centuries
old) being pictures of the "Dramatis Personae" of the Book;
and ShT being a haphazard line scrawled on the MS. touch
letters which added to 418, valuing "this circle squared in
its failure" as  GR:pi correct to six places of decimals,
etc.
   Again: "thou shalt know not"<<[WEH Note:  It is
remarkable that Crowley succeeds in blowing every quotation
of "Liber AL" on this page.  This despite the injunction of
the Book itself: AL I,54:  "Change not as much as the style
of a letter; for behold! thou, o prophet, shalt not behold
all these mysteries hidden therein."  Crowley strongly
resisted the idea that he could not understand all of the
Book.  In later life, he came to grudgingly accept this
limitation.  Also, Achad did not work out as his successor.
Several of these mis-quotes relate to that belief.  This
particular mis-quote could come from as many as six points
in the text, but here is no part of the text in which this
quote appears exactly.]>>, meaning "thou shalt know LA"; and
"he shall discover the Key of it all"<<[WEH Note: This
misquote could be from AL III,47: "... Let him not seek to
try: but one cometh after him, whence I say not, who shall
discover the Key of it all....".]>>, "id est," the Key AL.

  (c) His power to combine subsequent events beyond the
control of the scribe or his associates, so that they
confirmed statements in the Book.  Or, per contra, to
predict such events.
   E.g.  The first Scarlet Woman proved unworthy, and
suffered the exact penalties predicted.
   Again, "one cometh after thee; he shall discover the
key."<<[WEH Note: misquoted from AL II,76: "...There cometh
one to follow thee: he shall expound it. ..."]>>  This one
was to be the "child" of the scribe, "and that
strangely"<<[WEH Note: This time the misquote is in the
style of the letters: AL III,47: "This book shall be
translated into all tongues: but always with the original in
the writing of the Beast; for in the chance shape of the
letters and their position to one another: in these are
mysteries that no Beast shall divine.  Let him not seek to
try: but one cometh after him, whence I say not, who shall
discover the Key of it all.  Then this line drawn is a key:
then this circle squared in its failure is a key also.  And
Abrahadabra.  It shall be his child & that strangely.  Let
him not seek after this; for thereby alone can he fall from
it."  --- interesting that these misquotes seem to hit
verses that either appear to warn Crowley against misquoting
or of his limits.]>>.
   Nine months after THE BEAST 666 had gotten a Magical
"child" upon His concubine Jane Foster, a "Babe of the
Abyss" was born, Frater Achad asserting his right to that
grade, and thus "coming after" THE BEAST 666, who had been
the last Adept to do so.  And this "child" was definitely
"one", since "one" is the meaning of his motto Achad.
Finally, he did in fact "discover the key of it all"<<[WEH
Note: see the citation in an earlier note of mine.  This
time Crowley missed the "style of the letter" again.]>>
after THE BEAST Himself had failed to do so in 14 years of
study.

  (d) His power to conceive and express in concise terms
true solutions of the main problems of the Universe.
   E.g. The formula of Nuith and Hadith explain Existence in
the terms of Mathematical-Logical Philosophy, so as to
satisfy the difficulties of reconciling Dualism, Monism and
Nihilism; all {261} antinomies in all spheres; and the
Original Perfection with the Manifest Imperfection of
Things.
   Again "Do that thou wilt...", the most sublimely austere
ethical precept ever uttered, despite its apparent licence,
is seen on analysis to be indeed "...the whole of the Law.",
the sole and sufficient warrant for human action, the self-
evident Code of Righteousness, the identification of Fate
with Freewill, and the end of the Civil War in Man's nature
by appointing the Canon of Truth, the conformity of things
with themselves, to determine his every act.  "Do what thou
wilt..." is to bid Stars to shine, Vines to bear grapes,
Water to seek its level; man is the only being in Nature
that has striven to set himself at odds with himself.

  (e) His power to interpret the Spirit of the New Aeon, the
relapse into ruthless savagery of the most civilized races,
at a time when war was discredited by most responsible men.

  (f) His power to comprehend and control these various
orders of ideas and events, demonstrating thereby a mind and
a means of action intelligible to, yet immensely above, all
human capacity; to bind the whole into a compact cryptograph
displaying mastery of English, of mathematical and
philosophical conceptions, of poetic splendour and intense
passion, while concealing in the letters and words a complex
cipher involving the knowledge of facts never till than
existing in any human mind, and depending on the control of
the arm of the scribe, though He thought He was writing
consciously from dictation; and to weave into a single
pattern so many threads of proof of different orders that
every type of mind, so it be but open and just, may be sure
of the existence of AIWAZ as a being independent of body,
conscious and individual, with a mind mightier than man's,
and a power beyond man's set in motion by will.
   In a word, the Book of the Law proves the prime postulate
of Religion.
   The Magician may therefore be confident that Spiritual
Beings exist, and seek the Knowledge and conversation of His
own Holy Guardian Angel with the same ardour as that of
FRATER PERDURABO when He abandoned all: love, wealth, rank,
fame, to seek Him.  Nay, this he must do or condemn himself
to be {262} torn asunder by the Maenads of his insensate
impulses; he hath no safety save he himself be Bacchus!
Bacchus, divine and human!  Bacchus, begotten on Semele of
Zeus, the adulterous Lord of Thunder ravishing, brutally,
his virginal victim!  Bacchus, babe hidden from hate in the
most holy of holies, the secret of thy sire, in the Channel
of the Star-Spate, Whereof one Serpent is thy soul!
Bacchus, twy-formed, man-woman, Bacchus, whose innocence
tames the Tiger, while yet thy horns drip blood upon thy
mouth, and sharpen the merriment of wine to the madness of
murder! Bacchus, Thy thyrsus oozes sap; thine ivy clings to
it; thy Lion-skin slips from thy sleek shoulders, slips from
thy lissome loins; drunk on delight of the godly grape, thou
knowest no more the burden of the body and the vexation of
the spirit.

   Come, Bacchus, come thou hither, come out of the East;
come out of the East, astride the Ass of Priapus!  Come with
thy revel of dancers and singers!  Who followeth thee,
forbearing to laugh and to leap?  Come, in thy name
Dionysus, that maidens be mated to God-head!  Come, in thy
name Iacchus, with thy mystical fan to winnow the air, each
gust of thy Spirit inspiring our Soul, that we bear to thee
Sons in Thine Image!

   Verily and Amen!  Let not the Magician forget for a
single second what is his one sole business.  His
uninitiated "self" (as he absurdly thinks it) is a mob of
wild women, hysterical from uncomprehended and unstated
animal instinct; they will tear Pentheus, the merely human
king who presumes to repress them, into mere shreds of
flesh; his own mother, Nature, the first to claw at his
windpipe!  None but Bacchus, the Holy Guardian Angel, hath
grace to be God to this riot of maniacs; he alone can
transform the disorderly rabble into a pageant of harmonious
movements, tune their hyaena howls to the symphony of a
paean, and their reasonless rage to self-controlled rapture.
It is this Angel whose nature is doubly double, that He may
partake of every sacrament.  He is at once a God who is
drunken with the wine of earth, and the mammal who quaffs
the Blood of God to purge him of mortality.  He is a woman
as he accepts all impulses, are they not His?  He is a man
to stamp Himself upon whatever would hallow itself to Him.
He wields the Wand, {263} with cone of pine and ivy
tendrils; the Angel creates continually, wreathing His Will
in clinging beauty, imperishably green.
   The Tiger, the symbol of the brutal passions of man,
gambols about its master's heels; and He bestrides the Ass
of Priapus; he makes his sexual force carry him whither He
wills to go.
   Let the Magician therefore adventure himself upon the
Astral Plane with the declared design to penetrate to a
sanctuary of discarnate Beings such as are able to instruct
and fortify him, also to prove their identity by testimony
beyond rebuttal.  All explanations other than these are of
value only as extending and equilibrating Knowledge, or
possibly as supplying Energy to such Magicians as may have
found their way to the Sources of Strength.  In all cases,
naught is worth an obol save as it serve to help the One
Great Work.
  He who would reach Intelligences of the type under
discussion may expect extreme difficulty.  The paths are
guarded; there is a lion in the way.  Technical expertness
will not serve here; it is necessary to satisfy the Warders
of one's right to enter the presence of the Master.
Particular pledges may be demanded, ordeals imposed, and
initiations conferred.  These are most serious matters; the
Body of Light must be fully adult, irrevocably fixed, or it
will be disintegrated at the outset.  But, being fit to pass
through such experiences, it is bound utterly to its words
and acts.  It cannot even appear to break an oath, as its
fleshly fellow may do.
   Such, then is a general description of the Astral Plane,
and of the proper conduct of the Magician in his dealings
therewith.


                           -----------

 {264}









                           APPENDIX IV


                          LIBER SAMEKH

                       Theurgia Goetia Summa

                      (CONGRESSUS CUM DAEMONE)

                           sub figura DCCC

being the Ritual employed by the Beast 666 for the
Attainment of the Knowledge and Conversation of his Holy
Guardian Angel during the Semester of His performance of the
Operation of the Sacred Magick of ABRAMELIN THE MAGE.
(Prepared An XVII Sun in Virgo at the Abbey of Thelema in
Cephalaedium by the Beast 666 in service to FRATER
PROGRADIOR.)
   OFFICIAL PUBLICATION of A.'. A.'. Class D for the Grade
of Adeptus Minor.



{265}




                              POINT

                                I

                   EVANGELII TEXTUS REDACTUS

"The Invocation."

Magically restored, with the significance of the

                         BARBAROUS NAMES

Etymologically or Qabalistically determined and paraphrased
in English.

Section A.                                          The
Oath.

 1.  Thee I invoke, the Bornless One.
 2.  Thee, that didst create the Earth and the Heavens.
 3.  Thee, that didst create the Night and the Day.
 4.  Thee, that didst create the darkness and the Light.
 5.  Thou art ASAR UN-NEFER ("Myself made Perfect"):
       Whom no man hath seen at any time.
 6.  Thou art IA-BESZ ("the Truth in Matter").
 7.  Thou art IA-APOPHRASZ ("the Truth in Motion").
 8.  Thou hast distinguished between the Just and the
Unjust.
 9.  Thou didst make the Female and the Male.
10.  Thou didst produce the Seeds and the Fruit.
11.  Thou didst form Men to love one another, and to hate
one
       another.

Section Aa.

1.  I am ANKH - F - N - KHONSU thy Prophet, unto Whom
       Thou didst commit Thy Mysteries, the Ceremonies of
       KHEM.
2.  Thou didst produce the moist and the dry, and that which
       nourisheth all created Life.
3.  Hear Thou Me, for I am the Angel of PTAH - APO -
      PHRASZ - RA (vide the Rubric): this is Thy True Name,
      handed down to the Prophets of KHEM.  {266}

 Section B.                                            Air.

Hear Me: ---

AR                      "O breathing, flowing Sun!"
ThIAF<<The letter F is used to represent the Hebrew Vau and
the Greek Digamma; its sound lies between those of the
English long o and long oo, as in Rope and Tooth.>>
                        "O Sun IAF! O Lion-Serpent Sun, The
                          Beast that whirlest forth, a
thunder-
                          bolt, begetter of Life!"
RhEIBET                 "Thou that flowest!  Thou that
goest!"
A-ThELE-BER-SET         "Thou Satan-Sun Hadith that goest
                          without Will!"
A                       "Thou Air!  Breath!  Spirit!  Thou
                          without bound or bond!"
BELAThA                 "Thou Essence, Air Swift-streaming,
                          Elasticity!"
ABEU                    "Thou Wanderer, Father of All!"
EBEU                    "Thou Wanderer, Spirit of All!"
PhI-ThETA-SOE           "Thou Shining Force of Breath!  Thou
                          Lion-Serpent Sun!  Thou Saviour,
                          save!"
IB                      "Thou Ibis, secret solitary Bird,
inviolate
                          Wisdom, whose Word in Truth,
                          creating the World by its Magick!"
ThIAF                   "O Sun IAF!  O Lion-Serpent Sun, The
                          Beas that whirlest forth, a
thunder-
                          bolt, begetter of Life!"
(The conception is of Air, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-
Phallic Bird, "the Holy Ghost", of a Mercurial Nature.)
Hear me, and make all Spirits subject unto Me; so that every
Spirit of the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and
under the Earth, on dry land and in the water; of Whirling
Air, and of rushing Fire, and every Spell and Scourge of God
may be obedient unto Me.  {267}

Section C.                                         Fire.

I invoke Thee, the Terrible and Invisible God: Who dwellest
in the Void Place of the Spirit: ---

AR-O-GO-GO-RU-ABRAO     "Thou spiritual Sun!  Satan, Thou
                          Eye, Thou Lust!  Cry aloud!  Cry
                          aloud!  Whirl the Wheel, O my
                          Father, O Satan, O Sun!"
SOTOU                   "Thou, the Saviour!"
MUDORIO                 "Silence!  Give me Thy Secret!"
PhALARThAO              "Give me suck, Thou Phallus, Thou
                          Sun!"
OOO                     "Satan, thou Eye, thou Lust!"
                        "Satan, thou Eye, thou Lust!"
                        "Satan, thou Eye, thou Lust!"
AEPE                    "Thou self-caused, self-determined,
                          exalted, Most High!"

The Bornless One.  (Vide supra).
(The conception is of Fire, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-
Phallic Lion of a Uranian nature.)
Hear Me, and make all Spirits subject unto Me: so that every
Spirit of the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and
under the Earth: on dry Land and in the Water: of Whirling
Air, and of rushing Fire, and every Spell and Scourge of God
may be obedient unto Me.

Section D.                                        Water.

Hear Me: ---

RU-ABRA-IAF<<See, for the formula of IAF, or rather FIAOF,
Book 4 Part III, Chapter V.  The form FIAOF will be found
preferable in practice.>>
                        "Thou the Wheel, thou the Womb,
                         that containeth the Father IAF!"
MRIODOM                 "Thou the Sea, the Abode!"
BABALON-BAL-BIN-ABAFT   "Babalon!  Thou Woman of Whoredom"
{268}
                        "Thou, Gate of the Great God ON!
                          Thou Lady of the Understanding of
                          the Ways!"
ASAL-ON-AI              "Hail Thou, the unstirred!  Hail,
                          sister and bride of ON, of the God
                          that is all and is none, by the
Power
                          of Eleven!"
APhEN-IAF               "Thou Treasure of IAO!"
I                       "Thou Virgin twin-sexed!  Thou
Secret
                          Seed!  Thou inviolate Wisdom!"
PhOTETh                 "Abode of the Light
.................
ABRASAX                 "......of the Father, the Sun, of
                          Hadith, of the spell of the Aeon
                          of Horus!"
AEOOU                   "Our Lady of the Western Gate of
                          Heaven!"
ISChURE                 "Mighty art Thou!"

Mighty and Bornless One!  (Vide Supra)
(The conception is of Water, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-
Phallic Dragon-Serpent, of a Neptunian nature.)
Hear Me: and make all Spirits subject unto Me: so that every
Spirit of the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and
under the Earth: on dry Land and in the Water: of Whirling
Air, and of rushing Fire: and every Spell and Scourge of God
may be obedient unto Me.

Section E.                                        Earth.

I invoke Thee: ---

MA                      "O Mother!  O Truth!"
BARRAIO                 "Thou Mass!"<<"Mass", in the sense
of the word which is used by physicists.  The impossibility
of defining it will not deter the intrepid initiate (in view
of the fact that the fundamental conception is beyond the
normal categories of reason.)>>
IOEL                    "Hail, Thou that art!"
KOThA                   "Thou hollow one!" {269}
AThOR-e-BAL-O           "Thou Goddess of Beauty and Love,
                          whom Satan, beholding, desireth!"
ABRAFT                  "The Fathers, male-female, desire
                          Thee!"

(The conception is of Earth, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-
Phallic Hippopotamus<<Sacred to AHAThOOR.  The idea is that
of the Female conceived as invulnerable, reposeful, of
enormous swallowing capacity etc.>> of a Venereal nature.)
Hear Me: and make all Spirits subject unto Me: so that every
Spirit of the Firmament, and of the Ether: upon The Earth
and under the Earth: on dry land and in the Water: of
Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire: and every Spell and
Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me.

Section F.                                        Spirit.

Hear Me:

AFT                     "Male-Female Spirits!"
ABAFT                   "Male-Female Sires!"
BAS-AUMGN               "Ye that are Gods, going forth,
uttering
                          AUMGN.  (The Word that goeth
                          from
                          (A) Free Breath.
                          (U) through Willed Breath.
                          (M) and stopped Breath.
                          (GN) to Continuous Breath.
                          thus symbolizing the whole course
of
                          spiritual life.  A is the formless
Hero;
                          U is the six-fold solar sound of
physical
                          life, the triangle of Soul being
                          entwined with that of Body; M is
the
                          silence of "death"; GN is the
nasal
                          sound of generation & knowledge.
ISAK                    "Identical Point!"
SA-BA-FT                "Nuith!  Hadith!  Ra-Hoor-Khuit!"
                        "Hail, Great Wild Beast!"
                           "Hail, IAO!" {270}

Section Ff.

  1.  This is the Lord of the Gods:
  2.  This is the Lord of the Universe:
  3.  This is He whom the Winds fear.
  4.  This is He, Who having made Voice by His commandment
is Lord of all Things; King, Ruler and Helper.  Hear Me, and
make all Spirits subject unto Me: so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and under the
Earth: on dry Land and in the Water: of Whirling Air, and of
rushing Fire: and every Spell and Scourge of God may be
obedient unto Me.

Section G.                                        Spirit.

Hear Me:

IEOU                    "Indwelling Sun of Myself"
PUR                     "Thou Fire!  Thou Sixfold Star
initiator
                          compassed about with Force and
Fire!"
IOU                     "Indwelling Soul of Myself"
PUR                     (Vide Supra)
IAFTh                   "Sun-lion Serpent, hail!  All Hail,
thou
                          Great Wild Beast, thou I A O!"
IAEO                    "Breaths of my soul, breaths of mine
                          Angel."
IOOU                    "Lust of my soul, lust of mine
Angel!"
ABRASAX                 (Vide Supra).
SABRIAM                 "Ho for the Sangraal!  Ho for the
Cup
                          of Babalon!  Ho for mine Angel
                          pouring Himself forth within my
                          Soul!"
OO                      "The Eye!  Satan, my Lord!  The Lust
                          of the goat!"
FF                      "Mine Angel!  Mine initiator!  Thou
                          one with me --- the Sixfold Star!"
{271}
AD-ON-A-I<<In Hebrew, ADNI, 65.  The Gnostic Initiates
transliterated it to imply their own secret formulae; we
follow so excellent an example.  ON is an Arcanum of Arcana;
its significance is taught, gradually, in the O.T.O.  Also
AD is the paternal formula, Hadit; ON is its complement
NUIT; the final Yod signifies "mine" etymologically and
essentially the Mercurial (transmitted) hermaphroditic
virginal seed --- The Hermit of the Taro --- The use of the
name is therefore to invoke one's own inmost secrecy,
considered as the result of the conjunction of Nuit and
Hadit.  If the second A is included, its import is to affirm
the operation of the Holy Ghost and the formulation of the
Babe in the Egg, which precedes the appearance of the
Hermit.>>
                        "My Lord!  My secret self beyond
self,
                          Hadith, All Father!  Hail, ON,
thou
                          Sun, thou Life of Man, thou
Fivefold
                          Sword of Flame!  Thou Goat exalted
                          upon Earth in Lust, thou Snake
                          extended upon Earth in Life!
Spirit
                          most holy!  Seed most Wise!
Innocent
                          Babe.  Inviolate Maid!  Begetter
                          of Being!  Soul of all Souls!
Word
                          of all Words, Come forth, most
                          hidden Light!"
EDE                     "Devour thou me!"
EDU                     "Thou dost devour Me!"
ANGELOS TON ThEON       "Thou Angel of the Gods!"
ANLALA                  "Arise thou in Me, free flowing,
Thou
                          who art Naught, who art Naught,
and
                          utter thy Word!"
LAI                     "I also am Naught!  I Will Thee!  I
                          behold Thee!  My nothingness!"
GAIA                    "Leap up, thou Earth!"
                          (This is also an agonising appeal
to the
                          Earth, the Mother; for at this
point
                          of the ceremony the Adept should
be
                          torn from his mortal attachments,
and {272}
                          die to himself in the orgasm of
his
                          operation.<<A thorough
comprehension of Psycho-analysis will contribute notably to
the proper appreciation of this Ritual.>>)
AEPE                    "Thou Exalted One!  It (i.e. the
spritual
                          'semen', the Adept's secret ideas,
                          drawn irresistibly from their
"Hell"<<It is said
among men that the word Hell deriveth from the word "helan",
to hele or conceal, in the tongue of the Anglo-Saxons.  That
is, it is the concealed place, which since all things are in
thine own self, is the unconscious.  Liber CXI (Aleph) cap
GR:Delta-sigma>>
                          by the love of his Angel) leaps
up; it
                          leaps forth!<<But compare the use
of the same word in section C.>>
DIATHARNA THORON        "Lo! the out-splashing of the seeds
of
                          Immortality"

Section Gg.                                       The
Attainment.

1.  I am He! the Bornless Spirit! having sight in the feet:
      Strong, and the Immortal Fire!
2.  I am He! the Truth!
3.  I am He! Who hate that evil should be wrought in the
World!
4.  I am He, that lighteneth and thundereth!
5.  I am He, from whom is the Shower of the Life of Earth!
6.  I am He, whose mouth ever flameth!
7.  I am He, the Begetter and Manifester unto the Light!
8.  I am He, The Grace of the Worlds!
9.  "The Heart Girt with a Serpent" is my name!

Section H.                                  The "Charge to
the Spirit".

Come thou forth, and follow me: and make all Spirits subject
unto Me so that every Spirit of the Firmament, and of the
Ether, upon the Earth and under the Earth: on dry Land, or
in the Water: of Whirling Air or of rushing Fire, and every
Spell and scourge of God, may be obedient unto me!

Section J.                           The Proclamation of the
Beast 666.

  IAF:  SABAF<<See explanation in Point II.>>
      Such are the Words!  {273}




                             POINT

                              II

                 ARS CONGRESSUS CUM DAEMONE.

SECTION A       Let the Adeptus Minor be standing in this
circle on the
             square of Tiphereth, armed with his Wand and
Cup; but let him
             perform the Ritual throughout in his Body of
Light.  He may
             burn the Cakes of Light, or the Incense of
Abramelin; he may
             be prepared by Liber CLXXV, the reading of
Liber LXV, and by
             the practices of Yoga.  He may invoke Hadit by
"... wine and
             strange drugs" if he so will.<<Any such formula
should be used only when the adept has full knowledge based
on experience of the management of such matters.>>  He
prepares
             the circle by the usual formulae of Banishing
and
             Consecration, etc.
                He recites Section A as a rehearsal before
His Holy
             Guardian Angel of the attributes of that Angel.
Each phrase
             must be realized with full concentration of
force, so as to
             make Samadhi as perfectly as possible upon the
truth
             proclaimed.
"Line 1"          He identifies his Angel with the Ain Soph,
and the Kether
             thereof; one formulation of Hadit in the
boundless Body of
             Nuith.
"Line 2,3,4"      He asserts that His Angel has created (for
the purpose of
             self-realization through projection in
conditioned Form) three
             pairs of opposites: (a) The Fixed and the
Volatile; (b) The
             Unmanifested and the Manifest; and (c) the
Unmoved and the
             Moved.  Otherwise, the Negative and the
Positive in respect of
             Matter, Mind and Motion.
"Line 5"          He acclaims his Angel as "Himself Made
Perfect"; adding
             that this Individuality is inscrutable in
inviolable.  In the
             Neophyte Ritual of {274} G.'. D.'. (As it is
printed in Equinox
             I, II, for the old aeon) the Hierophant is the
perfected
             Osiris, who brings the candidate, the natural
Osiris, to
             identity with himself.  But in the new Aeon the
Hierophant is
             Horus (Liber CCXX, I, 49) therefore the
Candidate will be
             Horus too.  What then is the formula of the
initiation of
             Horus?  It will no longer be that of the Man,
through Death.
             It will be the natural growth of the Child.
His experiences
             will no more be regarded as catastrophic.
Their hieroglyph is
             the Fool: the innocent and impotent Harpocrates
Babe becomes
             the Horus Adult by obtaining the Wand.  "Der
reine Thor"
             seizes the Sacred Lance.  Bacchus becomes Pan.
The Holy
             Guardian Angel is the Unconscious Creature Self
--- the
             Spiritual Phallus.  His knowledge and
conversation contributes
             occult puberty.  It is therefore advisable to
replace the name
             Asar Un-nefer by that of Ra-Hoor-Khuit at the
outset, and by
             that of one's own Holy Guardian Angel when it
has been
             communicated.

"Line 6"          He hails Him as BESZ, the Matter that
destroys and devours
             Godhead, for the purpose of the Incarnation of
any God.

"Line 7"          He hails Him as APOPHRASZ, the Motion that
destroys and
             devours Godhead, for the purpose of the
Incarnation of any
             God.  The combined action of these two DEVILS
is to allow the
             God upon whom they prey to enter into enjoyment
of existence
             through the Sacrament of dividual "Life" (Bread
--- the flesh
             of BESZ) and "Love" (Wine --- the blood or
venom of AOPHRASZ).

"Line 8"          He acclaims His Angel as having "eaten of
the Fruit of the
             Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil"; otherwise,
having become
             wise (in the {275} Dyad, Chokmah) to apprehend
the formula of
             Equilibrium which is now His own, being able to
apply Himself
             accurately to His self-appointed environment.

"Line 9"          He acclaims His Angel as having laid down
the Law of Love
             as the Magical formula of the Universe, that He
may resolve
             the phenomenal again into its noumenal phase by
uniting any
             two opposites in ecstasic passion.

"Line 10"         He acclaims His Angel as having appointed
that this formula
             of Love should effect not only the dissolution
of the
             separateness of the Lovers into His own
impersonal Godhead,
             but their co-ordination in a "Child"
quintessentialized from
             its parents to constitute a higher order of
Being than theirs,
             so that each generation is an alchemical
progress towards
             perfection in the direction of successive
complexities.  As
             Line 9 asserts Involution, Line 10 asserts
Evolution.

"Line 11"         He acclaims His Angel as having devised
this method of
             self-realization; the object of Incarnation is
to obtain its
             reactions to its relations with other
incarnated Beings and to
             observe theirs with each other.

                            ----------

Section Aa.

"Line 1"          The Adept asserts his right to enter into
conscious
             communication with His Angel, on the ground
that that Angel
             has Himself taught him the Secret Magick by
which he may make
             the proper link.  "Mosheh" is M H, the
formation in Jechidah,
             Chiah, Neshamah, Ruach, --- The Sephiroth from
Kether to Yesod
             --- since 45 is GR:Sigma{=summation} 1-9 while
Sh, 300, is
             GR:Sigma{=summation} 1-24, which superadds to
these Nine an extra
             Fifteen numbers.  (See in Liber D {276} the
meanings an
             correspondences of 9, 15, 24, 45, 300, 345.)
                45 is moreover A D M, man.  "Mosheh" is thus
the name of
             man as a God-concealing form.  But in the
Ritual let the Adept
             replace this "Mosheh" by his own motto as
Adeptus Minor.  For
             "Ishrael" let him prefer his own Magical Race,
according to
             the obligations of his Oaths to Our Holy Order!
(The Beast
             666 Himself used "Ankh-f-n-Khonsu" and "Khem"
in this
             section.)
"Line 2"          The Adept reminds his Angel that He has
created That One
             Substance of which Hermes hath written in the
Table of
             Emerald, whose virtue is to unite in itself all
opposite modes
             of Being, thereby to serve as a Talisman
charged with the
             Spiritual Energy of Existence, an Elixir or
Stone composed of
             the physical basis of Life.  This Commemoration
is placed
             between the two personal appeals to the Angel,
as if to claim
             privilege to partake of this Eucharist which
createth,
             sustaineth and redeemeth all things.
"Line 3"          He now asserts that he is himself the
"Angel" or messenger
             of his Angel; that is, that he is a mind and
body whose office
             is to receive and transmit the Word of his
Angel.  He hails
             his Angel not only as "un-nefer" the Perfection
of "Asar"
             himself as a man, but as Ptah-Apophrasz-Ra, the
identity
             (Hadit) wrapped in the Dragon (Nuit) and
thereby manifested as
             a Sun (Ra-Hoor-Khuit).  The "Egg" (or Heart)
"girt with a
             Serpent" is a cognate symbol; the idea is thus
expressed later
             in the ritual.  (See Liber LXV. which expands
this to the
             uttermost.)

Section B       The Adept passes from contemplation to
action in the
             sections now following B to Gg.  He is to
travel astrally
             around the circle, making the appropriate
pentagrams, sigils,
             and signs.  His direction {277} is widdershins.
He thus makes
             three curves, each covering three-fourths of
the circle.  He
             should give the sign of the Enterer on passing
the Kiblah, or
             Direction of Boleskine.  This picks up the
force naturally
             radiating from that point<<This is an
assumption based on Liber Legis II, 78 and III, 34.>> and
projects it in the direction of
             the path of the Magician.  The sigils are those
given
             in the Equinox Vol. I, No. 7, Plate X outside
the
             square; the signs those shewn in Vol. I, No. 2,
Plate "The
             Signs of the Grades".  In these invocations he
should expand
             his girth and his stature to the utmost<<Having
experience of
             success in the practices of Liber 536, GR:beta-
alpha-tau-rho-alpha-chi-omicron-phi-rho-epsilon-nu-omicron-
beta-omicron-omicron-kappa-omicron-sigma-mu-omicron-mu-alpha-
chi-iota-alpha.>>, assuming the form and the consciousness
of the Elemental
             God of the quarter.  After this, he begins to
vibrate the
             "Barbarous Names" of the Ritual.
                Now let him not only fill his whole being to
the uttermost
             with the force of the Names; but let him
formulate his Will,
             understood thoroughly as the dynamic aspect of
his Creative
             Self, in an appearance symbolically apt, I say
not in the form
             of a Ray of Light, of a Fiery Sword, or of
aught save that
             bodily Vehicle of the Holy Ghost which is
sacred to BAPHOMET,
             by its virtue that concealeth the Lion and the
Serpent that
             His Image may appear adorably upon the Earth
for ever.
                Let then the Adept extend his Will beyond
the Circle in
             this imagined Shape and let it radiate with the
Light proper
             to the element invoked, and let each Word issue
along the
             Shaft with passionate impulse, as if its voice
gave command
             thereto that it should thrust itself leapingly
forward.  Let
             also each Word accumulate authority, so that
the Head of the
             Shaft may plunge twice as far for the Second
Word as for the
             First, and Four Times for {278} the Third as
the Second, and
             thus to the end.  Moreover, let the Adept fling
forth his
             whole consciousness thither.  Then at the final
Word, let him
             bring rushing back his Will within himself,
steadily
             streaming, and let him offer himself to its
point, as Artemis
             to PAN, that this perfectly pure concentration
of the Element
             purge him thoroughly, and possess him with its
passion.
                In this Sacrament being wholly at one with
that Element,
             let the Adept utter the Charge "Hear me, and
make", etc. with
             strong sense that this unity with that quarter
of the Universe
             confers upon him the fullest freedom and
privilege appurtenant
             thereto.
                Let the Adept take note of the wording of
the Charge.  The
             "Firmament" is the Ruach, the "mental plane";
it is the realm
             of Shu, or Zeus, where revolves the Wheel of
the Gunas, the
             Three forms<<They correspond to the Sulphur,
Mercury, and Salt of Alchemy; to Sattvas, Rajas, and Tamas
in the Hindu system; and are rather modes of action than
actual qualities even when conceived as latent.  They are
the apparatus of communication between the planes; as such,
they are conventions.  There is no absolute validity in any
means of mental apprehension; but unless we make these
spirits of the Firmament subject unto us by establishing
right relation (within the possible limits) with the
Universe, we shall fall into error when we develop our new
instrument of direct understanding.  It is vital that the
Adept should train his intellectual faculties to tell him
the truth, in the measure of their capacity.  To despise the
mind on account of its limitations is the most disastrous
blunder; it is the common cause of the calamities which
strew so many shores with the wreckage of the Mystic Armada.
Bigotry, Arrogance, Bewilderment, all forms of mental and
moral disorder, so often observed in people of great
spiritual attainment, have brought the Path itself into
discredit; almost all such catastrophes are due to trying to
build the Temple of the Spirit without proper attention to
the mental laws of structure and the physical necessities of
foundation.  The mind must be brought to its utmost pitch of
perfection, but according to its own internal properties;
one cannot feed a microscope on mutton chops.  It must be
regarded as a mechanical instrument of knowledge,
independent of the personality of its possessor.  One must
treat it exactly as one treats one's electroscope or one's
eyes; one influence of one's wishes.  A physician calls in a
colleague to attend to his own family, knowing that personal
anxiety may derange his judgment.  A microscopist who trusts
his eyes when his pet theory is at stake may falsify the
facts, and find too late that he has made a fool of himself.
   In the case of initiations itself, history is scarred
with the wounds inflicted by this Dagger.  It reminds us
constantly of the danger of relying upon the intellectual
faculties.  A judge must know the law in every point, and be
detached from personal prejudices, and incorruptible, or
iniquity will triumph.  Dogma, with persecution, delusion,
paralysis of progress, and many another evil, as its
satraps, has always established a tyranny when Genius has
proclaimed it.  Islam making a bonfire of written Wisdom,
and Haeckel forging biological evidence; physicists ignorant
of radioactivity disputing the conclusions of geology, and
theologians impatient of truth struggling against the tide
of thought; all such must perish at the hands of their own
error in making their minds, internally defective or
externally deflected, the measure of the Universe.>> of
Being.  The Aethyr is the {279}
             "akasha", the "Spirit", the Aethyr or physics,
which is the
             framework on which all forms are founded; it
receives, records
             and transmits all impulses without itself
suffering mutation
             thereby.  The "Earth" is the sphere wherein the
operation of
             these "fundamental" and aethyric forces appears
to perception.
             "Under the Earth" is the world of those
phenomena which inform
             those perceived projections, and determine
their particular
             character.  "Dry land" is the place of dead
"material things",
             dry (i.e. unknowable) because unable to act on
our minds.
             "Water" is the vehicle whereby we feel such
things; "air"
             their menstruum wherein these feelings are
mentally
             apprehended.  It is called "whirling" because
of the
             instability of thought, and the fatuity of
reason, on which we
             are yet dependent for what we call "life".
"Rushing Fire" is
             the world in which wandering thought burns up
to swift-darting
             Will.  These four stages explain how the non-
Ego is transmuted
             into the {280} Ego.  A "Spell" of God is any
form of
             consciousness, and a "Scourge" any form of
action.
                The Charge, as a whole, demands for the
Adept the control
             of every detail of the Universe which His Angel
has created as
             a means of manifesting Himself to Himself.  It
covers command
             of the primary projection of the Possible in
individuality, in
             the antithetical artifice which is the device
of Mind, and in
             a balanced triplicity of modes or states of
being whose
             combinations constitute the characteristics of
Cosmos.  It
             includes also a standard of structure, a
rigidity to make
             reference possible.  Upon these foundations of
condition which
             are not things in themselves, but the canon to
which things
             conform, is builded the Temple of Being, whose
materials are
             themselves perfectly mysterious, inscrutable as
the Soul, and
             like the Soul imagining themselves by symbols
which we may
             feel, perceive, and adapt to our use without
ever knowing the
             whole Truth about them.  The Adept sums up all
these items by
             claiming authority over every form of
expression possible to
             Existence, whether it be a "spell" (idea) or a
"scourge" (act)
             of "God", that is, of himself.  The Adept must
accept every
             "spirit", every "spell", every "scourge", as
part of his
             environment, and make them all "subject to"
himself; that is,
             consider them as contributory causes of
himself.  They have
             made him what he is.  They correspond exactly
to his own
             faculties.  They are all --- ultimately --- of
equal
             importance.  The fact that he is what he is
proves that each
             item is equilibrated.  The impact of each new
impression
             affects the entire system in due measure.  He
must therefore
             realize that every event is subject to him.  It
occurs because
             he had need of it.  Iron rusts because the
molecules demand
             oxygen for the satisfaction of {281} their
tendencies.  They
             do not crave hydrogen; therefore combination
with that gas is
             an event which does not happen.  All
experiences contribute to
             make us complete in ourselves.  We feel
ourselves subject to
             them so long as we fail to recognise this; when
we do, we
             perceive that they are subject to us.  And
whenever we strive
             to evade an experience, whatever it may be, we
thereby do
             wrong to ourselves.  We thwart our own
tendencies.  To live is
             to change; and to oppose change is to revolt
against the law
             which we have enacted to govern our lives.  To
resent destiny
             is thus to abdicate our sovereignty, and to
invoke death.
             Indeed, we have decreed the doom of death for
every breach of
             the law of Life.  And every failure to
incorporate any
             impression starves the particular faculty which
stood in need
             of it.
                This Section B invokes Air in the East, with
a shaft of
             golden glory.

                            --------

Section C.      The adept now invokes Fire in the South;
flame red are the
             rays that burst from his Verendum.

                            --------

Section D.      He invokes Water in the West, his Wand
billowing forth blue
             radiance.

                            --------

Section E.      He goes to the North to invoke Earth;
flowers of green
             flame flash from his weapon.  As practice makes
the Adept
             perfect in this Work, it becomes automatic to
attach all these
             complicated ideas and intentions to their
correlated words and
             acts.  When this is attained he may go deeper
into the formula
             by amplifying its correspondences.  Thus, he
may invoke water
             in the manner of water, extending {282} his
will with majestic
             and irresistible motion, mindful of its impulse
gravitation,
             yet with a suave and tranquil appearance of
weakness.  Again,
             he may apply the formula of water to its
peculiar purpose as
             it surges back into his sphere, using it with
conscious skill
             for the cleansing and calming of the receptive
and emotional
             elements in his character, and for the solution
or sweeping
             away of those tangled weeds of prejudice which
hamper him from
             freedom to act as he will.  Similar
applications of the
             remaining invocations will occur to the Adept
who is ready to
             use them.

                            --------

Section F.      The Adept now returns to the Tiphereth
square of his Tau,
             and invokes spirit, facing toward Boleskine, by
the active
             Pentagrams, the sigil called the Mark of the
Beast, and the
             Signs of L.V.X. (See plate as before).  He then
vibrates the
             Names extending his will in the same way as
before, but
             vertically upward.  At the same time he expands
the Source of
             that Will --- the secret symbol of Self ---
both about him and
             below, as if to affirm that Self, duplex as is
its form,
             reluctant to acquiesce in its failure to
coincide with the
             Sphere of Nuith.  Let him now imagine, at the
last Word, that
             the Head of his will, where his consciousness
is fixed, opens
             its fissure (the Brahmarandra-Cakkra, at the
junction of the
             cranial sutures) and exudes a drop of clear
crystalline dew,
             and that this pearl is his Soul, a virgin
offering to his
             Angel, pressed forth from his being by the
intensity of his
             Aspiration.

                            --------

Section Ff.     With these words the Adept does not withdraw
his will
             within him as in the previous Sections.  He
thinks of them as
             a reflection of Truth on the {283} surface of
the dew, where
             his Soul hides trembling.  He takes them to be
the first
             formulation in his consciousness of the nature
of His Holy
             Guardian Angel.
"Line 1."         The "Gods" include all the conscious
elements of his
             nature.
"Line 2."         The "Universe" includes all possible
phenomena of which he
             can be aware.
"Line 3."         The "Winds" are his thoughts, which have
prevented him from
             attaining to his Angel.
"Line 4."         His Angel has made "Voice", the magical
weapon which
             produces "Words", and these words have been the
wisdom by
             which He hath created all things.  The "Voice"
is necessary as
             the link between the Adept and his Angel.  The
Angel is
             "King", the One who "can", the "source of
authority and the
             fount of honour"; also the King (or King's Son)
who delivers
             the Enchanted Princess, and makes her his
Queen.  He is
             "Ruler", the "unconscious Will"; to be thwarted
no more by the
             ignorant and capricious false will of the
conscious man.  And
             He is "Helper", the author of the infallible
impulse that
             sends the Soul sweeping along the skies on its
proper path
             with such impetus that the attraction of alien
orbs is no
             longer sufficient to swerve it.  The "Hear me"
clause is now
             uttered by the normal human consciousness,
withdrawn to the
             physical body; the Adept must deliberately
abandon his
             attainment, because it is not yet his whole
being which burns
             up before the Beloved.

                            --------

Section G.      The Adept, though withdrawn, shall have
maintained the
             Extension of his Symbol.  He now repeats the
signs as before,
             save that he makes the Passive Invoking
Pentagram of Spirit.
             He concentrates {284} his consciousness within
his Twin-Symbol
             of Self, and endeavours to send it to sleep.
But if the
             operation be performed properly, his Angel
shall have accepted
             the offering of Dew, and seized with fervour
upon the extended
             symbol of Will towards Himself.  This then
shall He shake
             vehemently with vibrations of love
reverberating with the
             Words of the Section.  Even in the physical
ears of the adept
             there shall resound an echo thereof, yet he
shall not be able
             to describe it.  It shall seem both louder than
thunder, and
             softer than the whisper of the night-wind.  It
shall at once
             be inarticulate, and mean more than he hath
ever heard.
                Now let him strive with all the strength of
his Soul to
             withstand the Will of his Angel, concealing
himself in the
             closest cell of the citadel of consciousness.
Let him
             consecrate himself to resist the assault of the
Voice and the
             Vibration until his consciousness faint away
into Nothing.
             For if there abide unabsorbed even one single
atom of the
             false Ego, that atom should stain the virginity
of the True
             Self and profane the Oath; then that atom
should be so
             inflamed by the approach of the Angel that it
should overwhelm
             the rest of the mind, tyrannize over it, and
become an insane
             despot to the total ruin of the realm.
                But, all being dead to sense, who then is
able to strive
             against the Angel?  He shall intensify the
stress of His
             Spirit so that His loyal legions of Lion-
Serpents leap from
             the ambush, awakening the adept to witness
their Will and
             sweep him with them in their enthusiasm, so
that he
             consciously partakes their purpose, and sees in
its simplicity
             the solution of all his perplexities.  Thus
then shall the
             Adept be aware that he is being swept away
through the column
             of his Will Symbol, {285} and that His Angel is
indeed
             himself, with intimacy so intense as to become
identity, and
             that not in a single Ego, but in every
unconscious element
             that shares in that manifold uprush.
                This rapture is accompanied by a tempest of
brilliant
             light, almost always, and also in many cases by
an outburst of
             sound, stupendous and sublime in all cases,
though its
             character may vary within wide limits.<<These
phenomena are not wholly subjective; they may be perceived,
though often under other forms, by even the ordinary man.>>
                The spate of stars shoots from the head of
the Will-Symbol,
             and is scattered over the sky in glittering
galaxies.  This
             dispersion destroys the concentration of the
adept, whose mind
             cannot master such multiplicity of majesty; as
a rule, he
             simply sinks stunned into normality, to recall
nothing of his
             experience but a vague though vivid impression
of complete
             release and ineffable rapture.  Repetition
fortifies him to
             realise the nature of his attainment; and his
Angel, the link
             once made, frequents him, and trains him subtly
to be
             sensitive to his Holy presence, and persuasion.
But it may
             occur, especially after repeated success, that
the Adept is
             not flung back into his mortality by the
explosion of the
             Star-spate, but identified with one particular
"Lion-Serpent",
             continuing conscious thereof until it finds its
proper place
             in Space, when its secret self flowers forth as
a truth, which
             the Adept may then take back to earth with him.
                This is but a side issue.  The main purpose
of the Ritual
             is to establish the relation of the
subconscious self with the
             Angel in such a way that the Adept is aware
that his Angel is
             the Unity which expresses the sum of the
Elements of that
             Self, that his normal consciousness contains
alien enemies
             286} introduced by the accidents of
environment, and that his
             Knowledge and Conversation of His Holy Guardian
Angel destroys
             all doubts and delusions, confers all
blessings, teaches all
             truth, and contains all delights.  But it is
important that
             the Adept should not rest in mere inexpressible
realization of
             his rapture, but rouse himself to make the
relation submit to
             analysis, to render it in rational terms, and
thereby
             enlighten his mind and heart in a sense as
superior to
             fanatical enthusiasm as Beethoven's music is to
West African
             war-drums.

                            --------

Section Gg.     The adept should have realised that his Act
of Union with
             the angel implies (1) the death of his old mind
save in so far
             as his unconscious elements preserve its memory
when they
             absorb it, and (2) the death of his unconscious
elements
             themselves.  But their death is rather a going
forth to renew
             their life through love.  He then, by conscious
comprehension
             of them separately and together, becomes the
"Angel" of his
             Angel, as Hermes is the Word of Zeus, whose own
voice is
             Thunder.  Thus in this section the adept utters
articulately
             so far as words may, what his Angel is to
Himself.  He says
             this, with his Scin-Laeca wholly withdrawn into
his physical
             body, constraining His Angel to indwell his
heart.
"Line 1."         "I am He" asserts the destruction of the
sense of
             separateness between self and Self.  It affirms
existence, but
             of the third person only.  "The Bornless
Spirit" is free of
             all space, "having sight in the feet", that
they may choose
             their own path.  "Strong" is G B R, The
Magician escorted by
             the Sun and the Moon (See Liber D and Liber
777).  The
             "Immortal Fire" is the creative Self;
impersonal energy cannot
             perish, no matter what forms it assumes.
Combustion is Love.
             287
"Line 2."         "Truth" is the necessary relation of any
two things;
             therefore, although it implies duality, it
enables us to
             conceive of two things as being one thing such
that it demands
             to be defined by complementals.  Thus, an
hyperbola is a
             simple idea, but its construction exacts two
curves.
"Line 3."         The Angel, as the adept knows him, is a
being Tiphereth,
             which obscures Kether.  The Adept is not
officially aware of
             the higher Sephiroth.  He cannot perceive, like
the
             Ipsissimus, that all things soever are equally
illusion and
             equally Absolute.  He is in Tiphereth, whose
office is
             Redemption, and he deplores the events which
have caused the
             apparent Sorrow from which he has just escaped.
He is also
             aware, even in the height of his ecstasy, of
the limits and
             defects of his Attainment.
"Line 4."         This refers to the phenomena which
accompany his
             Attainment.
"Line 5."         This means the recognition of the Angel as
the True Self of
             his subconscious self, the hidden Life of his
physical life.
"Line 6."         The Adept realises every breath, every
word of his Angel as
             charged with creative fire.  Tiphereth is the
Sun, and the
             Angel is the spiritual Sun of the Soul of the
Adept.
"Line 7."         Here is summed the entire process of
bringing the
             conditioned Universe to knowledge of itself
through the
             formula of generation<<That is, Yod He,
realizing Themselves, Will and Understanding in the twins
Vau He, Mind and body.>>;
             a soul implants itself in sense-hoodwinked body
and reason-
             fettered mind, makes them aware of their
Inmate, and thus to
             partake of its own consciousness of the Light.
"Line 8."         "Grace" has here its proper sense of
"Pleasantness".  {288}
             The existence of the Angel is the justification
of the device
             of creation.<<But see also the general solution
of the Riddle of Existence in the Book of the Law and its
Comment --- Part IV of Book 4.>>
"Line 9."         This line must be studied in the light of
Liber LXV
             (Equinox XI. p. 65).

Section H.      This recapitulation demands the going forth
together of the
             Adept and his Angel "to do their pleasure on
the Earth among
             the living."

Section J.      The Beast 666 having devised the present
method of using
             this Ritual, having proved it by his own
practice to be of
             infallible puissance when properly performed,
and now having
             written it down for the world, it shall be an
ornament for the
             Adept who adopts it to cry Hail to His name at
the end of his
             work.  This shall moreover encourage him in
Magick, to recall
             that indeed there was One who attained by its
use to the
             Knowledge and Conversation of His Holy Guardian
Angel, the
             which forsook him no more, but made Him a
Magus, the Word of
             the Aeon of Horus!
                For know this, that the Name IAF in its most
secret and
             mighty sense declareth the Formula of the
Magick of the BEAST
             whereby he wrought many wonders.  And because
he doth will
             that the whole world shall attain to this Art,
He now hideth
             it herein so that the worthy may win to His
Wisdom.
                Let I and F face all;<<If we adopt the new
orthography VIAOV (Book 4 Part III Chap. V.) we must read
"The Sun-6-the Son" etc. for "all"; and elaborate this
interpretation here given in other ways, accordingly.  Thus
O (or F) will not be "The Fifteen by function" instead of
"Five" etc., and "in act free, firm, aspiring, ecstatic",
rather than "gentle" etc. as in the present text.>> yet ward
their A from attack.  The
             Hermit to himself, the Fool to foes, {289} The
Hierophant to
             friends, Nine by nature, Naught by attainment,
Five by
             function.  In speech swift, subtle and secret;
in thought
             creative, unbiassed, unbounded; in act gentle,
patient and
             persistent.  Hermes to hear, Dionysus to touch,
Pan to behold.
                A Virgin, A Babe, and a Beast!
                A Liar, an Idiot, and a Master of Men!
                A kiss, a guffaw, and a bellow; he that hath
ears to hear,
             let him hear!
                Take ten that be one, and one that is one in
three, to
             conceal them in six!
                Thy wand to all Cups, and thy Disk to all
Swords, but
             betray not thine Egg!
                Moreover also is IAF verily 666 by virtue of
Number; and
             this is a Mystery of Mysteries; Who knoweth it,
he is adept of
             adepts, and Mighty among Magicians!
                Now this word SABAF, being by number Three
score and Ten,<<There is an alternative spelling TzBA-F
Where the Root, "an Host", has the value of 93.  The
Practicus should revive this Ritual throughout in the Light
of his personal researches in the Qabalah, and thus make it
his own peculiar property.  The spelling here suggested
implies that he who utters the Word affirms his allegiance
to the symbols 93 and 6; that he is a warrior in the army of
Will and of the Sun.  93 is also the number of AIWAZ and 6
of The Beast.>> is a name of Ayin, the
             Eye, and the Devil our Lord, and the Goat of
Mendes.  He is
             the Lord of the Sabbath of the Adepts, and is
Satan, therefore
             also the Sun, whose number of Magick is 666,
the seal of His
             servant the BEAST.
                But again SA is 61, AIN, the Naught of
Nuith; BA means go,
             for Hadit; and F is their Son the Sun who is Ra-
Hoor-Khuit.
                So then let the Adept set his sigil upon all
the words he
             hath writ in the Book of the Works of his Will.
{290}
                And let him then end all, saying, Such are
the Words!<<The consonants of LOGOS, "Word", add (Hebrew
values) to 93.  and GR:Epsilon-Pi-Eta, "Words", (whence
"Epic") has also that value: GR:Epsilon-Iota-Delta-Epsilon
GR:Tau-Alpha  GR:Epsilon-Pi-Eta might be the phrase here
intended: its number is 418.  This would then assert the
accomplishment of the Great Work; this is the natural
conclusion of the Ritual.  Cf. CCXX. III. 75.>>  For by this
he maketh proclamation
             before all them that be about his Circle that
these
             Words are true and puissant, binding what he
             would bind, and loosing what he would loose.
                Let the Adept perform this Ritual aright,
perfect in every
             part thereof, once daily for one moon, then
twice, at dawn and
             dusk, for two moons, next, thrice, noon added,
for three
             moons, afterwards, midnight making up his
course, for four
             moons four times every day.  Then let the
Eleventh Moon be
             consecrated wholly to this Work; let him be
instant in
             continual ardour, dismissing all but his sheer
needs to eat
             and sleep.<<These needs are modified during the
process of Initiation both as to quantity and quality.  One
should not become anxious about one's physical or mental
health on a priori grounds, but pay attention only to
indubitable symptoms of distress should such arise.>>  For
know that the true
             Formula<<See Note page following.>> whose
virtue sufficed the
             Beast in this Attainment, was thus:

                               INVOKE OFTEN<<See Equinox I,
VIII, 22.>>

                So may all men come at last to the Knowledge
and
             Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel: thus
sayeth the
             Beast, and prayeth His own Angel that this book
be as a
             burning Lamp, and as a living Spring, for Light
and Life to
             them that read therein.

                              666
{291}

(Note to page 291)
   The Oracles of Zoroaster utter this:
   "And when, by often invoking, all the phantasms are
vanished, thou shalt see that Holy and Formless Fire, that
Fire which darts and flashes through all the Depths of the
Universe; hear thou the Voice of the Fire!
   "A similar Fire flashingly extending through the rushings
of Air, or a Fire formless whence cometh the Image of a
voice, or even a flashing Light abounding, revolving,
whirling forth, crying aloud.  Also there is the vision of
the fire-flashing Courser of Light, or also a Child, borne
aloft on the shoulders of the Celestial Steed, fiery, or
clothed with gold, or naked, or shooting with the bow shafts
or light, and standing on the shoulders of the horse, then
if thy meditation prolongeth itself, thou shalt unite all
these symbols into the form of a Lion."
   This passage --- combined with several others --- is
paraphased in poetry by Aleister Crowley in his
"Tannhauser".

        "And when, "invoking often," thou shalt see
        That formless Fire; when all the earth is shaken,
        The stars abide not, and the moon is gone,
        All Time crushed back into Eternity,
        The Universe by earthquake overtaken;
        Light is not, and the thunders roll,
        The World is done:
        When in the darkness Chaos rolls again
        In the excited brain:
        Then, O then call not to thy view that visible
        Image of Nature; fatal is her name!
        It fitteth not thy Body to behold
        That living light of Hell,
        The unluminous, dead flame,
        Until that body from the crucible
        Hath passed, pure gold!
        For, from the confines of material space,
        The twilight-moving place,
        The gates of matter, and the dark threshold,
        Before the faces of the Things that dwell
        In the Abodes of Night,
        Spring into sight
        Demons, dog-faced, that show no mortal sign
        Of Truth, but desecrate the Light Divine,
        Seducing from the sacred mysteries.
        But, after all these Folk of Fear are driven
        Before the avenging levin
        That rives the opening skies,
        Behold that formless and that Holy Flame {292}
        That hath no name;
        The Fire that darts and flashes, writhes and creeps
        Snake-wise in royal robe
        Wound round that vanished glory of the globe,
        Unto that sky beyond the starry deeps,
        Beyond the Toils of Time, --- then formulate
        In thine own mind, luminous, concentrate,
        The Lion of the Light, a child that stands
        On the vast shoulders of the Steed of God:
        Or winged, or shooting flying shafts, or shod
        With the flame-sandals.
                         Then, lift up thine hands!
        Centre thee in thine heart one scarlet thought
        Limpid with brilliance of the Light above!
        Drawn into naught
        All life, death, hatred, love:
        All self concentred in the sole desire ---
        Hear thou the Voice of Fire!"



                           -----------

 {293}





                              POINT

                               III


                   SCHOLION ON SECTIONS G & Gg.


   The Adept who has mastered this Ritual, successfully
realising the full import of this controlled rapture, ought
not to allow his mind to loosen its grip on the astral
imagery of the Star-spate, Will-Symbol, or Soul-symbol, or
even to forget its duty to the body and the sensible
surroundings.  Nor should he omit to keep his Body of Light
in close touch with the phenomena of its own plane, so that
its privy consciousness may fulfil its proper functions of
protecting his scattered ideals from obsession.
   But he should have acquired, by previous practice, the
faculty of detaching these elements of his consciousness
from their articulate centre, so that they become
(temporarily) independent responsible units, capable of
receiving communications from headquarters at will, but
perfectly able (1) to take care of themselves without
troubling their chief, and (2) to report to him at the
proper time.  In a figure, they must be like subordinate
officers, expected to display self-reliance, initiative, and
integrity in the execution of the Orders of the Day.
   The Adept should therefore be able to rely on these
individual minds of his to control their own conditions
without interference from himself for the time required, and
to recall them in due course, receiving an accurate report
of their adventures.
   This being so, the Adept will be free to concentrate his
deepest self, that part of him which unconsciously orders
his true Will, upon the realization of his Holy Guardian
Angel.  The absence of his bodily, mental and astral
consciousness is indeed cardinal to success, for it is their
usurpation of his attention which has made him deaf to his
Soul, and his preoccupation with their affairs that has
prevented him from perceiving that Soul.  {294}
   The effect of the Ritual has been
   (a) to keep them so busy with their own work that they
cease to distract him;
   (b) to separate them so completely that his soul is
stripped of its sheaths;
   (c) to arouse in him an enthusiasm so intense as to
intoxicate and anaesthetize him, that he may not feel and
resent the agony of this spiritual vivisection, just as
bashful lovers get drunk on the wedding night, in order to
brazen out the intensity of shame which so mysteriously
coexists with their desire;
   (d) to concentrate the necessary spiritual forces from
every element, and fling them simultaneously into the
aspiration towards the Holy Guardian Angel; and
   (e) to attract the Angel by the vibration of the magical
voice which invokes Him.
   The method of the Ritual is thus manifold.
   There is firstly an analysis of the Adept, which enables
him to calculate his course of action.  He can decide what
must be banished, what purified, what concentrated.  He can
then concentrate his will upon its one essential element,
over-coming its resistance --- which is automatic, like a
physiological reflex --- by destroying inhibitions through
his ego-overwhelming enthusiasm.<<A high degree of
initiation is required.  This means that the process of
analysis must have been carried out very thoroughly.  The
Adept must have become aware of his deepest impulses, and
understood their true significance.  The "resistance" here
mentioned is automatic; it increases indefinitely against
direct pressure.  It is useless to try to force oneself in
these matters; the uninitiated Aspirant, however eager he
may be, is sure to fail.  One must know how to deal with
each internal idea as it arises.     It is impossible to
overcome one's inhibitions by conscious effort; their
existence justifies them.  God is on their side, as on that
of the victim in Browning's "Instans Tyrannus."  A man
cannot compel himself to love, however much he may want to,
on various rational grounds.  But on the other hand, when
the true impulse comes, it overwhelms all its critics; they
are powerless either to make or break a genius; it can only
testify to the fact that it has met its master.>>  The other
half of the work needs no such complex effort; for his Angel
is simple and unperplexed, ready at all times to respond to
rightly ordered approach.  {295}
   But the results of the Ritual are too various to permit
of rigid description.  One may say that, presuming the union
to be perfect, the Adept need not retain any memory soever
of what has occurred.  He may be merely aware of a gap in
his conscious life, and judge of its contents by observing
that his nature has been subtly transfigured.  Such an
experience might indeed be the proof of perfection.
   If the Adept is to be any wise conscious of his Angel it
must be that some part of his mind is prepared to realise
the rapture, and to express it to itself in one way or
another.  This involves the perfection of that part, its
freedom from prejudice and the limitations of rationality so-
called.  For instance: one could not receive the
illumination as to the nature of life which the doctrine of
evolution should shed, if one is passionately persuaded that
humanity is essentially not animal, or convinced that
causality is repugnant to reason.  The Adept must be ready
for the utter destruction of his point of view on any
subject, and even that of his innate conception of the forms
and laws of thought.<<Of course, even false tenets and modes
of the mind are in one sense true.  It is only their
appearance which alters.  Copernicus did not destroy the
facts of nature, or change the instruments of observation.
He merely effected a radical simplification of science.
Error is really a "fool's knot".  Moreover, the very
tendency responsible for the entanglement is one of the
necessary elements of the situation.  Nothing is "wrong" in
the end; and one cannot reach the "right" point of view
without the aid of one's particular "wrong" point.  If we
reject or alter the negative of a photograph we shall not
get a perfect positive.>>  Thus he may find that his Angel
consider his "business" or his "love" to be absurd trifles;
also that human ideas of "time" are invalid, and human
"laws" of logic applicable only to the relations between
illusions.
   Now the Angel will make contact with the Adept at any
point that is sensitive to His influence.  Such a point will
naturally be one that is salient in the Adept's character,
and also one that is, in the proper sense of the word,
pure<<This means, free from ideas, however excellent in
themselves, which are foreign to it.  For instance, literary
interest has no proper place in a picture.>>.
   Thus an artist, attuned to appreciate plastic beauty is
likely to {296} receive a visual impression of his Angel in
a physical form which is sublimely quintessential of his
ideal.  A musician may be rapt away by majestic melodies
such as he never hoped to hear.  A philosopher may attain
apprehension of tremendous truths, the solution of problems
that had baffled him all his life.
   Conformably with this doctrine, we read of illuminations
experienced by simple-minded men, such as a workman who "saw
God" and likened Him to "a quantity of little pears".
Again, we know that ecstasy, impinging upon unbalanced
minds, inflames the idolised idea, and produces fanatical
faith fierce even to frenzy, with intolerance and insanely
disordered energy which is yet so powerful as to effect the
destinies of empires.
   But the phenomena of the Knowledge and Conversation of
the Holy Guardian Angel are a side issue; the essence of the
Union is the intimacy.  Their intimacy (or rather identity)
is independent of all partial forms of expression; at its
best it is therefore as inarticulate as Love.
   The intensity of the consummation will more probably
compel a sob or a cry, some natural physical gesture of
animal sympathy with the spiritual spasm.  This is to be
criticised as incomplete self-control.  Silence is nobler.
   In any case the Adept must be in communion with his
Angel, so that his Soul is suffused with sublimity, whether
intelligible or not in terms of intellect.  It is evident
that the stress of such spiritual possession must tend to
overwhelm the soul, especially at first.  It actually
suffers from the excess of its ecstasy, just as extreme love
produces vertigo.  The soul sinks and swoons.  Such weakness
is fatal alike to its enjoyment and its apprehension.  "Be
strong! then canst thou bear more rapture!" sayeth the Book
of the Law.<<Liber Al vel Legis, II, 61-68, where the
details of the proper technique are discussed. {WEH Note
extension:  The passage in quotations in this sentence
nowhere appears in "The Book of the Law".  Crowley is
evidently recapitulating several passages in a paraphrase.
AL II, 22 starts this, and the verses cited in this note
conclude it.}>>
   The Adept must therefore play the man, arousing himself
to harden his soul.
   To this end, I, the Beast, have made trial and proof of
divers devices.  Of these the most potent is to set the body
to strive with {297} the soul.  Let the muscles take grip on
themselves as if one were wrestling.  Let the jaw and mouth,
in particular, be tightened to the utmost.  Breathe deeply,
slowly, yet strongly.  Keep mastery over the mind by
muttering forcibly and audibly.  But lest such muttering
tend to disturb communion with the Angel, speak only His
Name.  Until the Adept have heard that Name, therefore, he
may not abide in the perfect possession of his Beloved.  His
most important task is thus to open his ears to the voice of
his Angel, that he may know him, how he is called.  For
hearken! this Name, understood rightly and fully, declareth
the nature of the Angel in every point, wherefore also that
Name is the formula of the perfection to which the Adept
must aspire, and also of the power of Magick by virtue
whereof he must work.
   He then that is as yet ignorant of that Name, let him
repeat a word worthy of this particular Ritual.  Such are
Abrahadabra, the Word of the Aeon, which signifieth "The
Great Work accomplished"; and Aumgn interpreted in Part III
of Book 4<<The essence of this matter is that the word AUM,
which expresses the course of Breath (spiritual life) from
free utterance through controlled concentration to Silence,
is transmuted by the creation of the compound letter  GR:Mu-
Gamma-Nu to replace M: that is, Silence is realized as
passing into continuous ecstatic vibration, of the nature of
"Love" under "Will" as shewn by  GR:Mu-Gamma-Nu = 40 + 3 +
50 = 93  GR:Alpha-Gamma-Alpha-Pi-Eta,  GR:Theta-Epsilon-
Lambda-Eta-Mu-Alpha etc., and the whole word has the value
of 100, Perfection Perfected, the Unity in completion, and
equivalent to  GR:Kappa-Rho the conjunction of the essential
male and female principles.>>; and the name of THE BEAST,
for that His number showeth forth this Union with the Angel,
and His Work is no other than to make all men partakers of
this Mystery of the Mysteries of Magick.
   So then saying this word or that, let the Adept wrestle
with his Angel and withstand Him, that he may constrain Him
to consent to continue in communion until the consciousness
becomes capable of clear comprehension, and of accurate
transmission<<The "normal" intellect is incapable of these
functions; a superior faculty must have been developed.  As
Zoroaster says: "Extend the void mind of thy soul to that
Intelligible that thou mayst learn the Intelligible, because
it subsisteth beyond Mind.  Thou wilt not understand It as
when understanding some common thing.">> of the {298}
transcendent Truth of the Beloved to the heart that holds
him.
   The firm repetition of one of these Words ought to enable
the Adept to maintain the state of Union for several
minutes, even at first.
   In any case he must rekindle his ardour, esteeming his
success rather as an encouragement to more ardent aspiration
than as a triumph.  He should increase his efforts.
   Let him beware of the "lust of result", of expecting too
much, of losing courage if his first success is followed by
a series of failures.
   For success makes success seem so incredible that one is
apt to create an inhibition fatal to subsequent attempts.
One fears to fail; the fear intrudes upon the concentration
and so fulfils its own prophecy.  We know how too much
pleasure in a love affair makes one afraid to disgrace
oneself on the next few occasions; indeed, until familiarity
has accustomed one to the idea that one's lover has never
supposed one to be more than human.  Confidence returns
gradually.  Inarticulate ecstasy is replaced by a more sober
enjoyment of the elements of the fascination.
   Just so one's first dazzled delight in a new landscape
turns, as one continues to gaze, to the appreciation of
exquisite details of the view.  At first they were blurred
by the blinding rush of general beauty; they emerge one by
one as the shock subsides, and passionate rapture yields to
intelligent interest.
   In the same way the Adept almost always begins by
torrential lyrics painting out mystical extravagances about
"ineffable love", "unimaginable bliss", "inexpressible
infinities of illimitable utterness".<<This corresponds to
the emotional and metaphysical fog which is characteristic
of the emergence of thought from homogeneity.  The clear and
concise differentiation of ideas marks the adult mind.>>  He
usually loses his sense of proportion, of humour, of
reality, and of sound judgment.  His ego is often inflated
to the bursting point, till he would be abjectly ridiculous
if he were not so pitifully dangerous to himself and others.
He also tends to take his new-found "truths of illumination"
for the entire body of truth, and insists that they must be
as valid an vital for all men as they happen to be for
himself.  {299}
   It is wise to keep silence about those things "unlawful
to utter" which one may have heard "in the seventh heaven".
This may not apply to the sixth.
   The Adept must keep himself in hand, however tempted to
make a new heaven and a new earth in the next few days by
trumpeting his triumphs.  He must give time a chance to
redress his balance, sore shaken by the impact of the
Infinite.
   As he becomes adjusted to intercourse with his Angel, he
will find his passionate ecstasy develop a quality of peace
and intelligibility which adds power, while it informs and
fortifies his mental and moral qualities instead of
obscuring and upsetting them.  He will by now have become
able to converse with his Angel, impossible as it once
seemed; for he now knows that the storm of sound which he
supposed to be the Voice was only the clamour of his own
confusions.  The "infinity" nonsense was born of his own
inability to think clearly beyond his limits, just as a
Bushman, confronted by numbers above five, can only call
them "many".
   The truth told by the Angel, immensely as it extends the
horizon of the Adept, is perfectly definite and precise.  It
does not deal in ambiguities and abstractions.  It possesses
form, and confesses law, in exactly the same way and degree
as any other body of truth.  It is to the truth of the
material and intellectual spheres of man very much what the
Mathematics of Philosophy with its "infinite series" and
"Cantorian continuity" is to schoolboy arithmetic.  Each
implies the other, though by that one may explore the
essential nature of existence, and by this a pawnbroker's
profits.
   This then is the true aim of the Adept in this whole
operation, to assimilate himself to his Angel by continual
conscious communion.  For his Angel is an intelligible image
of his own true Will, to do which is the whole of the law of
his Being.
   Also the Angel appeareth in Tiphereth, which is the heart
of the Ruach, and thus the Centre of Gravity of the Mind.
It is also directly inspired from Kether, the ultimate Self,
through the Path of the High Priestess, or initiated
intuition.  Hence the Angel is in truth the Logos or
articulate expression of the whole Being of the Adept, so
that as he increases in the perfect understanding of {300}
His name, he approaches the solution of the ultimate
problem, Who he himself truly is.
   Unto this final statement the Adept may trust his Angel
to lead him; for the Tiphereth-consciousness alone is
connected by paths with the various parts of his mind.<<See
the maps "Minutum Mundum" in the Equinox 1, 2, & 3 and the
general relations detailed in Liber 777, of which the most
important columns are reprinted in Appendix V.>>  None
therefore save He hath the knowledge requisite for
calculating the combinations of conduct which will organise
and equilibrate the forces of the Adept, against the moment
when it becomes necessary to confront the Abyss.  The Adept
must control a compact and coherent mass if he is to make
sure of hurling it from him with a clean-cut gesture.
   I, The Beast 666, lift up my voice and swear that I
myself have been brought hither by mine Angel.  After that I
had attained unto the Knowledge and Conversation of Him by
virtue of mine ardour towards Him, and of this Ritual that I
bestow upon men my fellows, and most of His great Love that
He beareth to me, yea, verily, He led me to the Abyss; He
bade me fling away all that I had and all that I was; and He
forsook me in that Hour.  But when I came beyond the Abyss,
to be reborn within the womb of BABALON, then came he unto
me abiding in my virgin heart, its Lord and Lover!
   Also He made me a Magus, speaking through His Law, the
Word of the new Aeon, the Aeon of the Crowned and Conquering
Child.<<For the account of these matters see The Equinox,
Vol. I, "The Temple of Solomon the King", Liber 418, Liber
Aleph, John St. John, The Urn, and Book 4, Part IV.>> Thus
he fulfilled my will to bring full freedom to the race of
Men.
   Yea, he wrought also in me a Work of wonder beyond this,
but in this matter I am sworn to hold my peace.

{301}












                          APPENDIX V

             A FEW OF THE PRINCIPAL CORRESPONDENCES

                         OF THE QABALAH.

                  REPRINTED WITH ADDITIONS FROM

                              777



                              {303}



                             TABLE I


.===========.=========================.=====================
=.
    :     I     :           II            :        III
:
    : KEY SCALE : HEBREW NAMES OF NUMBERS : ENGLISH OF
COLUMN II :
    :           :        & LETTERS        :
:
    :-----------+-------------------------+-----------------
-----:
    :           :Aleph-Yod-Nunfinal       :  Nothing.
:
    :     0     :Aleph-Yod-Nunfinal       :  No Limit.
:
    :           :Samekh-Vau-Pehfinal      :
:
    :           :Aleph-Yod-Nunfinal       :  Limitless
L.V.X.    :
    :           :Samekh-Vau-Pehfinal      :
:
    :           :Aleph-Vau-Resh           :
:
    :     1     :Koph-Taw-Resh            :  Crown.
:
    :     2     :Chet-Koph-Mem-Heh        :  Wisdom.
:
    :     3     :Bet-Yod-Nun-Heh          :  Understanding.
:
    :     4     :Chet-Samekh-Dalet        :  Mercy.
:
    :     5     :Gemel-Bet-Vau-Resh-Heh   :  Strength.
:
    :     6     :Taw-Peh-Aleph-Resh-Taw   :  Beauty.
:
    :     7     :Nun-Tzaddi-Chet          :  Victory.
:
    :     8     :Heh-Vau-Dalet            :  Splendour.
:
    :     9     :Yod-Samekh-Vau-Dalet     :  Foundation.
:
    :    10     :Mem-Lamed-Koph-Vau-Taw   :  Kingdom.
:
    : 11        :Aleph-Lamed-Pehfinal     :  Ox.
:
    :    12     :Bet-Yod-Taw              :  House.
:
    :    13     :Gemel-Mem-Lamed          :  Camel.
:
    :    14     :Dalet-Lamed-Taw          :  Door.
:
    :       15  :Heh-Heh                  :  Window.
:
    :       16  :Vau-Vau                  :  Nail.
:
    :       17  :Zain-Yod-Nunfinal        :  Sword.
:
    :       18  :Chet-Yod-Taw             :  Fence.
:
    :       19  :Tet-Yod-Taw              :  Serpent.
:
    :       20  :Yod-Vau-Dalet            :  Hand.
:
    :    21     :Koph-Pehfinal            :  Palm.
:
    :       22  :Lamed-Mem-Dalet          :  Ox Goad.
:
    : 23        :Mem-Yod-Memfinal         :  Water.
:
    :       24  :Nun-Vau-Nunfinal         :  Fish.
:
    :       25  :Samekh-Mem-Kophfinal     :  Prop.
:
    :       26  :Ayin-Yod-Nunfinal        :  Eye.
:
    :    27     :Peh-Heh                  :  Mouth.
:
    :       28  :Tzaddi-Dalet-Yod         :  Fish-hook.
:
    :       29  :Qof-Vau-Pehfinal         :  Back of Head.
:
    :    30     :Resh-Yod-Shin            :  Head.
:
    : 31        :Shin-Yod-Nunfinal        :  Tooth.
:
    :    32     :Taw-Vau                  :  Tau (as
Egyptian).  :
    : 32 "bis"  :Taw-Vau                  :   ---
:
    : 31 "bis"  :Shin-Yod-Nunfinal        :   ---
:
    :           :                         :
:
    :           :                         :
:
    :           :                         :
:
    :           :                         :
:
    :           :                         :
:
    :           :                         :
:


                        {304 & 305}



                             TABLE I

.===========.=========================.=====================
==========.
:     I     :           VI            :              VII
:
: KEY SCALE : THE HEAVENS OF ASSIAH   :     ENGLISH OF
COLUMN VI      :
:-----------+-------------------------+---------------------
----------:
:     1     :Resh-Aleph-Shin-Yod-Taw  :  Sphere of the
Primum Mobile  :
:           :Heh-Gemel-Lamed-Gemel-   :
:
            :   Lamed-Yod-Memfinal    :
:
:     2     :Mem-Samekh-Lamed-Vau-Taw :  Sphere of the
Zodiac         :
:           :                         :     Fixed Stars
:
:     3     :Shin-Bet-Taw-Aleph-Yod   :  Sphere of Saturn
:
:     4     :Tzaddi-Dalet-Qof         :  Sphere of Jupiter
:
:     5     :Mem-Aleph-Dalet-Yod-     :  Sphere of Mars
:
:           :   Memfinal              :
:
:     6     :Shin-Mem-Shin            :  Sphere of Sol
:
:     7     :Nun-Vau-Gemel-Heh        :  Sphere of Venus
:
:     8     :Koph-Vau-Koph-Bet        :  Sphere of Mercury
:
:     9     :Lamed-Bet-Nun-Heh        :  Sphere of Luna
:
:    10     :Chet-Lamed-Memfinal      :  Sphere of the
Elements       :
:           :Yod-Samekh-Vau-Dalet-    :
:
:           :   Vau-Taw               :
:
: 11        :Resh-Vau-Chet            :  Air
:
:    12     : (Planets following      :  MERCURY
:
:           : Sephiroth corresponding):
:
:    13     :                         :  Luna
:
:    14     :                         :  Venus
:
:       15  :Tet-Lamed-Heh            :  Aries  Fire
:
:       16  :Shin-Vau-Resh            :  Taurus Earth
:
:       17  :Taw-Aleph-Vau-Mem-Yod-   :  Gemini Air
:
:           :   Memfinal              :
:
:       18  :Samekh-Resh-Tet-Nunfinal :  Cancer Water
:
:       19  :Aleph-Resh-Yod-Heh       :  Leo Fire
:
:       20  :Bet-Taw-Vau-Lamed-Heh    :  Virgo Earth
:
:    21     :                         :  Jupiter
:
:       22  :Mem-Aleph-Zain-Nun-Yod-  :  Libra Air
:
:           :   Memfinal              :
:
: 23        :Mem-Yod-Memfinal         :  Water
:
:       24  :Ayin-Qof-Resh-Bet        :  Scorpio Water
:
:       25  :Qof-Shin-Taw             :  Sagittarius Fire
:
:       26  :Gemel-Dalet-Yod          :  Capricornus Earth
:
:    27     :                         :  Mars
:
:       28  :Dalet-Lamed-Yod          :  Aquarius Air
:
:       29  :Dalet-Gemel-Yod-Memfinal :  Pisces Water
:
:    30     :                         :  Sol
:
: 31        :Aleph-Shin               :  Fire
:
:    32     :                         :  Saturn
:
: 32 "bis"  :Aleph-Resh-Tzaddifinal   :  Earth
:
: 31 "bis"  :Aleph-Taw                :  Spirit
:
:           :                         :
:
:           :                         :
:
:           :                         :
:
:           :                         :
:


                            {306 & 307}




                             TABLE I

.=========.================.===================.============
===========.
:         :      IX        :        XI         :         XII
:
:         :   THE SWORD    :     ELEMENTS      :
:
:         :      AND       :(WITH THEIR PLANE- :   THE TREE
OF LIFE    :
:         :   THE SERPENT  :   TARY RULERS)    :
:
:         :                :Do not confuse with:
:
:         :                :rulers of Zodiac.  :
:
:---------+----------------+-------------------+------------
-----------:
:    0
:................:...................:......................
.:
:    1    : The Flaming    :   Root of Air     :1st Plane
Middle Pillar:
:    2    : Sword follows  :    "   "  Fire    :2nd   "
Right    "   :
:    3    : the downward   :    "   "  Water   :2nd   "
Left     "   :
:    4    : course of the  :    "   "  Water   :3rd   "
Right    "   :
:    5    : Sephiroth, and :    "   "  Fire    :3rd   "
Left     "   :
:    6    : is compared    :    "   "  Air     :4th   "
Middle   "   :
:    7    : to the Light-  :    "   "  Fire    :5th   "
Right    "   :
:    8    : ning Flash.    :    "   "  Water   :5th   "
Left     "   :
:    9    : Its hilt is    :    "   "  Air     :6th   "
Middle   "   :
:   10    : in Kether and  :    "   "  Earth   :7th   "
"      "   :
:         : its point in   :                   :
:
:         : Malkuth.       :                   :
:
:         :                :                   :
:
:11       :The Serpent of  : Hot and Moist Air :Path joins 1-
2         :
:   12    :Wisdom follows  :...................:  "    "   1-
3         :
:   13    :the course of   :...................:  "    "   1-
6         :
:   14    :the paths or    :...................:  "    "   2-
3         :
:      15 :letters upward, : Sun Fire Jupiter  :  "    "   2-
6         :
:      16 :its head being  : Venus Earth Moon  :  "    "   2-
4         :
:      17 :thus in Aleph,  : Saturn Air Mercury:  "    "   3-
6         :
:      18 :its tail in Taw.: Mars Water        :  "    "   3-
5         :
:      19 :Aleph, Mem, &   : Sun Fire Jupiter  :  "    "   4-
5         :
:         :Shin are        :                   :
:
:      20 :the Mother      : Venus Earth Moon  :  "    "   4-
6         :
:   21    :letters, re-    :...................:  "    "   4-
7         :
:      22 :ferring to the  : Saturn Air Mercury:  "    "   5-
6         :
:23       :Elements; Bet,  : Cold & Moist Water:  "    "   5-
8         :
:      24 :Gemel, Dalet,   : Mars Water        :  "    "   6-
7         :
:         :Koph, Peh, Resh :                   :
:
:      25 :and Taw, the    : Sun Fire Jupiter  :  "    "   6-
9         :
:      26 :Double letters, : Venus Earth Moon  :  "    "   6-
8         :
:   27    :to the Planets; :...................:  "    "   7-
8         :
:      28 :the rest,       : Saturn Air Mercury:  "    "   7-
9         :
:      29 :Single letters, : Mars Water        :  "    "   7-
10        :
:   30    :to the Zodiac.  :...................:  "    "   8-
9         :
:31       :                : Hot and Dry Fire  :  "    "   8-
10        :
:   32    :................:...................:  "    "   9-
10        :
:32 "bis" :                : Cold and Dry
Earth:.......................:
:31 "bis"
:................:...................:......................
.:
:         :                :                   :
:
{WEH NOTE: Row 29 has been corrected, original had a typo of
Mars Fire}

                                 {308}




                             TABLE I

.=========.====================================.============
===========.
:         :              XIV                   :         XV
:
:         :       GENERAL ATTRIBUTION          :    THE KING
SCALE     :
:         :           OF TAROT                 :      OF
COLOUR        :
:---------+------------------------------------+------------
-----------:
:    1    :The 4 Aces                          :Brilliance
:
:    2    :The 4 Twos --- Kings or Knights     :Pure Soft
Blue         :
:    3    :The 4 Threes --- Queens             :Crimson
:
:    4    :The 4 Fours                         :Deep violet
:
:    5    :The 4 Fives                         :Orange
:
:    6    :The 4 Sixes --- Emperors or Princes :Clear pink
rose        :
:    7    :The 4 Sevens                        :Amber
:
:    8    :The 4 Eights                        :Violet
purple          :
:    9    :The 4 Nines                         :Indigo
:
:   10    :The 4 Tens --- Empresses or         :Yellow
:
:         :               Princesses           :
:
:11       :The Fool --- (Swords) Emperors or   :Bright pale
yellow     :
:         :             Princes                :
:
:   12    :The Juggler                         :Yellow
:
:   13    :The High Priestess                  :Blue
:
:   14    :The Empress                         :Emerald
Green          :
:      15 :The Emperor                         :Scarlet
:
:      16 :The Hierophant                      :Red Orange
:
:      17 :The Lovers                          :Orange
:
:      18 :The Chariot                         :Amber
:
:      19 :Strength                            :Yellow,
greenish       :
:      20 :Hermit                              :Green
yellowish        :
:   21    :Wheel of Fortune                    :Violet
:
:      22 :Justice                             :Emerald
Green          :
:23       :The Hanged Man --- (Cups) Queens    :Deep blue
:
:      24 :Death                               :Green blue
:
:      25 :Temperance                          :Blue
:
:      26 :The Devil                           :Indigo
:
:   27    :The House of God                    :Scarlet
:
:      28 :The Star                            :Violet
:
:      29 :The Moon                            :Crimson
(ultra violet) :
:   30    :The Sun                             :Orange
:
:31       :The Angel or Last Judgment ---      :Glowing
orange scarlet :
:         :    (Wands) Kings or Knights        :
:
:   32    :The Universe                        :Indigo
:
:32 "bis" :Empresses (Coins)                   :Citrine,
olive, russet :
:         :                                    :  and
black(1)         :
:31 "bis" :All 22 trumps                       :White
merging into grey:
:-----------------------------------------------------------
-----------:
:  (1) The Pure Earth known to the Ancient Egyptians, during
that      :
: Equinox of the Gods over which Isis presided (i.e. The
Pagan Era) was:
: taken as Green.
:

                                 {309}




                             TABLE I

.=========.=============================.===================
===========.
:         :           XIX               :             XXII
:
:KEY SCALE: SELECTION OF EGYPTIAN GODS  :      SMALL
SELECTION OF      :
:         :                             :         HINDU
DEITIES        :
:---------+-----------------------------+-------------------
-----------:
:    0    :Harpocrates, Amoun, Nuith.   :AUM.
:
:    1    :Ptah, Asar un Nefer, Hadith. :Parabrahm (or any
other whom  :
:         :                             :  one wishes to
please).      :
:    2    :Amoun, Thoth, Nuith (Zodiac).:Shiva, Vishnu (as
Buddha ava- :
:         :                             : tara).Akasa(as
matter).Lingam:
:    3    :Maut, Isis, Nephthys.        :Bhavani (all forms
of Sakti), :
:         :                             :  Prana (as Force),
Yoni.     :
:    4    :Amoun, Isis.                 :Indra, Brahma.
:
:    5    :Horus, Nephthys.             :Vishnu, Varruna-
Avatar.       :
:    6    :Asar, Ra.                    :Vishnu-Hari-Krishna-
Rama.     :
:    7    :Hathoor.                     :Bhavani (all forms
of Sakti). :
:         :                             :  Prana (as Force),
Yoni.     :
:    8    :Anubis.                      :Hanuman.
:
:    9    :Shu.                         :Ganesha Vishnu
(Kurm Avatar). :
:   10    :Seb. Lower (i.e. unwedded),  :Lakshmi, etc.
(Kundalini)     :
:         :  Isis and Nephthys.         :
:
:11       :Nu.                          :The Maruts (Vayu).
:
:   12    :Thoth and Cynocephalus.      :Hanuman, Vishnu (as
Parasa-   :
:         :                             :  Rama).
:
:   13    :Chomse.                      :Chandra (as Moon).
:
:   14    :Hathoor.                     :Lalita(sexual
aspect of Sakti):
:      15 :Men Thu.                     :Shiva.
:
:      16 :Asar Ameshet Apis.           :Shiva (Sacred
Bull).          :
:      17 :Various twin dieties, Rehkt  :Various twin and
hybrid       :
:         :  Merti, etc.                :  Deities.
:
:      18 :Kephra.
:..............................:
:      19 :Ra-Hoor-Khuit, Pasht, Sekhet,:Vishnu (Nara-Singh
Avatar).   :
:         :  Mau, Sekhmet.              :
:
:      20 :Isis (as Virgin).            :The Gopi Girls, the
Lord of   :
:         :                             :  Yoga.
:
:   21    :Amoun-Ra.                    :Brahma, Indra.
:
:      22 :Ma.                          :Yama.
:
:23       :Tum Athph Auramoth (as Water):Soma (apas).
:
:         :  Asar (as Hanged Man),      :
:
:         :  Hekar, Isis.               :
:
:      24 :Merti goddesses, Typhon,     :Kundalini.
:
:         :  Apep, Khephra.             :
:
:      25 :.............................:Vishnu (Horse-
Avatar).        :
:      26 :Khem (Set).                  :Lingam, Yoni.
:
:   27    :Horus.
:..............................:
:      28 :Ahephi, Aroueris.
:..............................:
:      29 :Khephra (as Scarab in Tarot  :Vishnu (Matsya
Avatar).       :
:         :  Trump).                    :
:
:   30    :Ra and many others.          :Surya (as Sun).
:
:31       :Thoum-aesh-neith, Mau, Ka-   :Agni (Tejas) Yama,
(as God of :
:         :  beshunt, Horus, Tarpesheth.:  last Judgment).
:
:   32    :Sebek, Mako.                 :Brahama.
:
:32 "bis" :Satem, Ahapshi, Nephthys,    :(Prithivi).
:
:         :  Ameshet.                   :
:
:31 "bis" :Asar.                        :(Akasa).
:
:         :                             :
:

                           {310 & 311}




                             TABLE I

.=========.=============================.===================
===========.
:         :          XXXIV              :             XXXV
:
:KEY SCALE:     SOME GREEK GODS         :       SOME ROMAN
GODS        :
:---------+-----------------------------+-------------------
-----------:
:    0
:Pan..........................:.............................
.:
:    1    :Zeus, Iacchus                :Jupiter
:
:    2    :Athena, Uranus               :Janus
:
:    3    :Cybele, Demeter, Rhea, Here  :Juno, Cybele,
Saturn, Hecate  :
:    4    :Poseidon                     :Jupiter
:
:    5    :Ares, Hades                  :Mars
:
:    6    :Iacchus, Apollo, Adonis      :Apollo
:
:    7    :Aphrodite, Nike              :Venus
:
:    8    :Hermes                       :Mercury
:
:    9    :Zeus (as Air), Diana of      :Diana (as Moon)
:
:         :  Ephesus (as phallic stone) :
:
:   10    :Persephone (Adonis), Psyche  :Ceres
:
:11       :Zeus                         :Jupiter
:
:   12    :Hermes                       :Mercury
:
:   13    :Artemis, Hecate              :Diana
:
:   14    :Aphrodite                    :Venus
:
:      15 :Athena                       :Mars, Minerva
:
:      16 :(Here)                       :Venus
:
:      17 :Castor & Pollux, Apollo the  :Casto & Pollux
(Janus)        :
:         :  Diviner                    :
:
:      18 :Apollo the Charioteer        :Mercury
:
:      19 :Demeter (borne by lions)     :Venus (repressing
the fire of :
:         :                             :  Vulcan)
:
:      20 :(Attis)                      :(Attis) Ceres,
Adonis         :
:   21    :Zeus                         :Jupiter (Pluto)
:
:      22 :Themis, Minos, AEacus, and   :Vulcan
:
:         :  Rhadamanthus               :
:
:23       :Poseidon                     :Neptune
:
:      24 :Ares                         :Mars
:
:      25 :Apollo, Artemis (hunters)    :Diana (as Archer)
:
:      26 :Pan, Priapus (Erect Hermes   :Pan, Vesta,
Bacchus, Priapus  :
:         :  and Bacchus)               :
:
:   27    :Ares                         :Mars
:
:      28 :(Athena), Ganymede           :Juno
:
:      29 :Poseidon                     :Neptune
:
:   30    :Helios, Apollo               :Apollo
:
:31       :Hades                        :Vulcan, Pluto
:
:   32    :(Athena)                     :Saturn
:
:32 "bis" :(Demeter)                    :Ceres
:
:31 "bis" :Iacchus                      :(Liber)
:
:         :                             :
:

                                {312}




                             TABLE I

.=========.=============================.===================
===========.
:         :         XXXVIII             :            XXXIX
:
:KEY SCALE:    ANIMALS, REAL AND        :      PLANTS, REAL
AND        :
:         :        IMAGINARY            :         IMAGINARY
:
:---------+-----------------------------+-------------------
-----------:
:    0
:.............................:.............................
.:
:    1    :God.                         :Almond in flower.
:
:    2    :Man.                         :Amaranth.
:
:    3    :Woman.                       :Cypress, Opium
Poppy.         :
:    4    :Unicorn.                     :Olive, Shamrock.
:
:    5    :Basilisk.                    :Oak, Nux Vomica,
Nettle.      :
:    6    :Phoenix, Lion, Child.        :Acacia, Bay,
Laurel, Vine.    :
:    7    :Lynx.                        :Rose.
:
:    8    :Hermaphrodite, Jackal, Twin  :Moly, Anhalonium
Lewinii.     :
:         :  Serpents.                  :
:
:    9    :Elephant.                    :(Banyan) Mandrake,
Damiana,   :
:         :                             :  Yohimba.
:
:   10    :Sphinx.                      :Willow, Lily, Ivy.
:
:11       :Eagle or Man (Cherub of Air).:Aspen.
:
:   12    :Swallow, Ibis, Ape, Twin     :Vervain, Herb
Mercury,        :
:         :  Serpents.                  :  Marjolane, Palm.
:
:   13    :Dog.                         :Almond, Mugwort,
Hazel,       :
:         :                             :  (as Moon).
Moonworth,      :
:         :                             :  Ranunculus.
:
:   14    :Sparrow, Dove, Swan.         :Myrtle, Rose,
Clover.         :
:      15 :Ram, Owl.                    :Tiger Lily,
Geranium.         :
:      16 :Bull (Cherub of Earth).      :Mallow.
:
:      17 :Magpie, Hybrids.             :Hybrids, Orchids.
:
:      18 :Crab, Turtle, Sphinx.        :Lotus.
:
:      19 :Lion (Cherub of Fire).       :Sunflower.
:
:      20 :Virgin, Anchorite, any       :Snowdrop, Lily,
Narcissus.    :
:         :  solitary person or animal. :
:
:   21    :Eagle.                       :Hyssop, Oak,
Poplar, Fig.     :
:      22 :Elephant.                    :Aloe.
:
:23       :Eagle-snake-scorpion         :Lotus, all Water
Plants.      :
:         :  (Cherub of Water).         :
:
:      24 :Scorpion, Beetle, Lobster or :Cactus.
:
:         :  Crayfish, Wolf.            :
:
:      25 :Centaur, Horse, Hyppogriff,  :Rush.
:
:         :  Dog.                       :
:
:      26 :Goat, Ass.                   :Indian Hemp, Orchis
Root,     :
:         :                             :  Thistle.
:
:   27    :Horse, Bear, Wolf.           :Absinthe, Rue.
:
:      28 :Man or Eagle (Cherub of Air).:(Olive) Cocoanut.
:
:         :  Peacock.                   :
:
:      29 :Fish, Dolphin, Crayfish,     :Unicellular
Organisms, Opium. :
:         :  Beetle.                    :
:
:   30    :Lion, Sparrowhawk.           :Sunflower, Laurel,
Heliotrope.:
:31       :Lion (Cherub of Fire).       :Red Poppy,
Hibiscus, Nettle.  :
:   32    :Crocodile.                   :Ash, Cypress,
Hellebore, Yew, :
:         :                             :  Nightshade.
:
:32 bis   :Bull (Cherub of Earth).      :Oak, Ivy.
:
:31 bis   :Sphinx (if Sworded and       :Almond in flower.
:
:         :  Crowned).                  :
:
:         :                             :
:
{WEH NOTE: lines 11, 16, 28 & 32 bis corrected as to
element; original had typos of Fire, Air, Fire and Water
respectively.}
                           {313 & 314}




                             TABLE I

.=========.=============================.===================
=============.
:         :            XL               :             XLI
:
:KEY SCALE:     PRECIOUS STONES         :       MAGICAL
WEAPONS          :
:---------+-----------------------------+-------------------
-------------:
:    0
:.............................:.............................
...:
:    1    :Diamond.                     :Swastika or Fylfat
Cross,       :
:         :                             :  Crown.
:
:    2    :Star Ruby, Turquoise.        :Lingam, the Inner
Robe of       :
:         :                             :  Glory.
:
:    3    :Star Sapphire, Pearl.        :Yoni, the Outer
Robe of         :
:         :                             : Concealment.
:
:    4    :Amethyst, Sapphire.          :The Wand, Sceptre,
or Crook.    :
:    5    :Ruby.                        :The Sword, Spear,
Scourge or    :
:         :                             :  Chain.
:
:    6    :Topaz, Yellow Diamond.       :The Lamen or Rosy
Cross.        :
:    7    :Emerald.                     :The Lamp and
Girdle.            :
:    8    :Opal, especially Fire Opal.  :The Names and
Versicles,        :
:         :                             :  the Apron.
:
:    9    :Quartz.                      :The Perfumes and
Sandals.       :
:   10    :Rock Crystal.                :The Magical Circle
& Triangle  .:
:11       :Topaz, Chalcedony.           :The Dagger or Fan.
:
:   12    :Opal, Agate.                 :The Wand or
Caducesus.          :
:   13    :Moonstone, Pearl, Crystal.   :Bow and Arrow.
:
:   14    :Emerald, Turquoise.          :The Girdle.
:
:      15 :Ruby.                        :The Horns, Energy,
the Burin.   :
:      16 :Topaz.                       :The Labour of
Preparation.      :
:      17 :Alexandrite, Tourmaline,     :The Tripod.
:
:         :  Iceland Spar.              :
:
:      18 :Amber.                       :The Furnace.
:
:      19 :Cat's Eye.                   :The Discipline
(Preliminary).   :
:      20 :Peridot.                     :The Lamp and Wand
(Virile       :
:         :                             : Force reserved),
the Bread.    :
:   21    :Amethyst, Lapis Lazuli.      :The Sceptre.
:
:      22 :Emerald.                     :The Cross of
Equilibrium.       :
:23       :Beryl or Aquamarine.         :The Cup and Cross
of Suffer-    :
:         :                             :  ing, the Wine.
:
:      24 :Snakestone.                  :The Pain of the
Obligation.     :
:      25 :Jacinth.                     :The Arrow (swift
and straight   :
:         :                             :  application of
Force).        :
:      26 :Black Diamond.               :The Secret Force,
Lamp.         :
:   27    :Ruby, any red stone.         :The Sword.
:
:      28 :Artificial Glass.            :The Censer or
Aspergillus.      :
:      29 :Pearl.                       :The Twilight of the
Place,      :
:         :                             :  Magic Mirror.
:
:   30    :Crysoleth.                   :The Lamen or Bow
and Arrow.     :
:31       :Fire Opal.                   :The Wand, Lamp,
Pyramid of Fire.:
:   32    :Onyx.                        :The Sickle.
:
:32 "bis" :Salt.                        :The Pantacle, the
Salt.         :
:31 "bis"
:.............................:.............................
...:
:         :                             :
:

                           {315 & 316}


                             TABLE I
.=========.===================.==========.==================
============.
:         :       XLII        :   LIII   :             XLIX
:
:KEY SCALE:     PERFUMES      :THE GREEK :    LINEAL FIGURES
OF THE     :
:         :                   :ALPHABET  :    PLANETS AND
GEOMANCY      :
:---------+-------------------+----------+------------------
------------:
:    0    :...................:          :The Circle.
:
:    1    :Ambergris.         :          :The Point.
:
:    2    :Musk               : (sigma)  :The Line, also the
Cross.     :
:    3    :Myrrh, Civet       :          :The Plane, also
the Diamond,  :
:         :                   :          : Oval, Circle and
other Yoni  :
:         :                   :          : Symbols.
:
:    4    :Cedar              : (iota)   :The Solid Figure.
:
:    5    :Tobacco            : (phi)    :The Tessaract.
:
:    6    :Olibanum           : omega    :  Sephirotic
Geomantic Fi-    :
:    7    :Benzoin, Rose,     : epsilon  :  gures follow the
Planets.   :
:         :  Red Sandal       :          :  Caput and Cauda
Draconis    :
:    8    :Storax             :          :  are the Nodes of
the Moon,  :
:    9    :Jasmine, Jinseng,  : chi      :  nearly =
Herschel and       :
:         :  all Odoriferous  :          :  Neptune
respectively.       :
:         :  Roots            :          :  They belong to
Malkuth.     :
:   10    :Dittany of Crete   : Sampi    :
:
:11       :Galbanum           : alpha    :Those of Airy
Triplicity.     :
:   12    :Mastic, White      : beta     :Octagram.
:
:         :  Sandal, Mace,    :          :
:
:         :  Storax, all Fu-  :          :
:
:         :  gitive Odours.   :          :
:
:   13    :Menstrual Blood,   : gamma    :Enneagram.
:
:         :  Camphor, Aloes,  :          :
:
:         :  all Sweet        :          :
:
:         :  Virginal Odours. :          :
:
:   14    :Sandalwood, Myrtle : delta    :Heptagram.
:
:         :  all Soft Volup-  :          :
:
:         :  tuous Odours.    :          :
:
:      15 :Dragon's Blood.    : epsilon  :Puer.
:
:      16 :Storax.            : digamma  :Amissio.
:
:      17 :Wormwood.          : zeta     :Albus.
:
:      18 :Onycha.            : eta      :Populus and Via.
:
:      19 :Olibanum.          : theta    :Fortuna Major &
Fortuna Minor.:
:      20 :White Sandal,      : iota     :Conjunctio.
:
:         :  Narcissus.       :          :
:
:   21    :Saffron, all       : kappa    :Square and
Rhombus.           :
:         :  Generous Odours. :          :
:
:      22 :Galbanum.          : lambda   :Puella.
:
:23       :Onycha, Myrrh.     : mu       :Those of Watery
Triplicity.   :
:      24 :Siamese Benzoin,   : nu       :Rubeus.
:
:         :  Opoponax.        :          :
:
:      25 :Lign-aloes.        :xi (sigma):Acquisitio.
:
:      26 :Musk, Civet (also  : omicron  :Carcer.
:
:         :Saturnian perfumes):          :
:
:   27    :Pepper, Dragon's   : pi       :Pentagram.
:
:         :  Blood, all Hot   :          :
:
:         :  Pungent Odours.  :          :
:
:      28 :Galbanum.          : psi      :Tristitia.
:
:      29 :Ambergris.         : koppa    :Laetitia.
:
:   30    :Olibanum, Cinamon, : rho      :Hexagram.
:
:         :all Glorious Odours:          :
:
:31       :Olibanum, all      : sampi    :Those of Firey
Triplicity.    :
:         :  Fiery Odours.    :          :
:
:   32    :Assafoetida,       : tau      :Triangle.
:
:         : Scammony, Indigo, :          :
:
:         : Sulphur, all Evil :          :
:
:         : Odours.           :          :
:
:32 bis   :Storax, all Dull   : upsilon  :Those of Earthy
Triplicity.   :
:         :  Heavy Odours.    :          :
:
{WEH NOTE: on line 9, Chi was omitted; lines 21 & 32 bis,
Chi and Tau there by error.  These have been restored from
Liber 777}    {317 & 318}


                             TABLE II

.=========.==========.===============.====================.=
===========.
:         :   LIV    :     LV        :        LXIII       :
LXIV    :
:KEY SCALE:   THE    :THE ELEMENTS   :
:SECRET NAMES:
:         :LETTERS OF:    AND        :  THE FOUR WORLDS   :
OF THE FOUR:
:         : THE NAME :   SENSES      :                    :
WORLDS   :
:---------+----------+---------------+--------------------+-
-----------:
:   11    : Vau      : Air, Smell.   :Yetzirah, Formative
:Mem-Heh  Mah:
:         :          :               :  World.            :
:
:   23    : Heh      : Water, Taste. :Briah, Creative
:Samekh-Gemel:
:         :          :               :  World.            :
Seg:
:   31    : Yod      : Fire, Sight.  :Atziluth,
Archetypal:Ayin-Bet  Ob:
:         :          :               :  World.            :
:
:32 "bis" : Heh      : Earth, Touch. :Assiah, Material
:Bet-Nunfinal:
:         :          :               :  World.            :
Ben:
:31 "bis" : Shin     : Spirit,
:....................:............:
:         :          :    Hearing.   :                    :
:
:         :          :               :                    :
:
:=========+========.=.========.======.====.===============.=
==.========:
:         : LXVIII :  LXIX    :    LXX    :      LXXV
: LXXVI  :
:         :THE PART:   THE    :ATTRIBUTION:THE FIVE ELEMENTS
:THE FIVE:
:         :  OF    :ALCHEMICAL:    OF     :    (TATWAS)
:SKANDHAS:
:         :THE SOUL: ELEMENTS : PENTAGRAM :
:        :
:---------+--------+----------+-----------+-----------------
--+--------:
:   11    :HB:RVCh : Mercury  :Left Upper :Vayu - The Blue
:Sankhara:
:         :Ruach   :          :  Point.   :  Circle.
:        :
:   23    :HB:NShMH: Salt     :Right Upper:Aupas - The
Silver :Vedana. :
:         :Neshamah:          :  Point.   :  Crescent
:        :
:   31    :HB:ChYH : Sulphur  :Right Lower:Agni or Tejas -
:San~~n~~a.  :
:         :Chiah   :          :  Point.   :  The Red
Triangle.:        :
:32 "bis" :HB:NPSh : Salt     :Left Lower :Prithivi - The
:Rupa    :
:         :Nephesh :          :  Point.   :  Yellow Square.
:        :
:31 "bis" :H:YChYDH:          :Topmost    :Akasa - The Black
:Vin~~nanam:
:         :Iechidah:          :  Point.   :  Egg.
:        :
:---------.--------.----------.-----------.-----------------
--.--------:
:
:
:                          TABLE III
:
:=========.===================.=============.===============
===========:
:         :       LXXVII      :    LXXXI    :
LXXXIII          :
:         :    THE PLANETS    :             :   THE
ATTRIBUTION OF     :
:         : AND THEIR NUMBERS :    METALS   :     THE
HEXAGRAM         :
:---------+-------------------+-------------+---------------
-----------:
:   12    : Mercury    8      : Mercury.    : Left Lower
Point.        :
:   13    : Moon       9      : Silver.     : Bottom Point.
:
:   14    : Venus      7      : Copper.     : Right Lower
Point.       :
:   21    : Jupiter    4      : Tin.        : Right Upper
Point.       :
:   27    : Mars       5      : Iron.       : Left Upper
Point.        :
:   30    : Sun        6      : Gold.       : Centre Point.
:
:   31    : Saturn     3      : Lead.       : Top Point.
:

                                {319}



                             TABLE IV

.=========.======.=======.=================.=========.======
=============.
:         :XCVII : CXVII :     CXVIII      :  CXXIV  :
CXXXIII       :
:KEY SCALE:PARTS :  THE  : THE CHAKKRAS OR :   THE   :
TITLES AND      :
:         :  OF  :  SOUL :    CENTRES OF   :HEAVENLY :
ATTRIBUTIONS OF   :
:         : THE  :(HINDU):      PRANA      :HEXAGRAM :  THE
WAND SUIT    :
:         : SOUL :       :    (HINDUISM)   :         :
(CLUBS)       :
:---------+------+-------+-----------------+---------+------
-------------:
:    0
:......:.......:.................:.........:................
...:
:    1    :YChYDH:Atma   :Sahasrara (above : Jupiter :The
Root of the    :
:         :      :       :  Head).         :         :
Powers of Fire.   :
:    2    :ChYH  :Buddhi :Ajna (Pineal     : Mercury :Mars
in Aries      :
:         :      :       :  Gland).        :         :
Dominion.        :
:    3    :NShMH :Higher :Visuddhi         : Moon    :Sun in
Aries Esta- :
:         :      : Manas :  (Larynx).      :[Saturn  :
blished Strength. :
:         :      :       :                 : Daath]  :
:
:        -.      .-      .-                :         :
:
:    4    :      :.......:.................: Venus   :Venus
in Aries     :
:         :      :       :                 :         :
Perfected Work. :
:    5    :      :Lower -:Anahata (Heart)  : Mars    :Saturn
in Leo      :
:         :      :       :                 :         :
Strife.         :
:         :      : Manas :                 :         :
:
:    6    :      :.......:.................:    Sun
:Jupiter in Leo   :
:         :      :       :                 :         :
Victory.        :
:         :      :       .-                :         :
:
:    7    :-RVCh :Kama   :Manipura (Solar  :         :Mars
in Leo Valour.:
:         :      :       :  Plexus).       :         :
:
:    8    :      :Prana  :Svadistthana     :
:Mercury in Sagit-  :
:         :      :       :                 :         :
tarius Swiftness.:
:         :      :       :  (Navel).       :         :
:
:    9    :      :Linga  .-               -.         :Moon
in Sagittarius:
:        -.      .Sharira:                 :         :
Great Strength. :
:         :      :      -:Muladhara (Lingam:         :
:
:   10    :NPSh  :Sthula :  and Anus).     :         :Saturn
in Sagit-   :
:         :      :       :                 :         :
tarius Oppression.:
:         :      :Sharira:                 :         :
:
:         :      :       .-               -.         :
:
:---------.------.-----------------------------------.------
-------------:
:                   XCVIII --- English of Col. XCVII
:
:       The Self........... 1    The Intellect. 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9.        :
:       The Life Force..... 2    The Animal soul which
:
:       The Intuition...... 3      perceives and feels.. 10
:

                                {320}



                             TABLE IV

.=========.====================.===================.========
===========.
:         :       CXXXIV       :      CXXXV        :
CXXXVI        :
:KEY SCALE:     TITLES AND     :    TITLES AND     :
TITLES AND      :
:         :ATTRIBUTIONS OF THE :  ATTRIBUTIONS OF  :
ATTRIBUTIONS OF   :
:         :CUP OR CHALICE SUIT :  THE SWORD SUIT   :THE
COIN, DISC OR  :
:         :      (HEARTS)      :     (SPADES)      :
PANTACLE SUIT    :
:         :                    :                   :
(DIAMONDS)     :
:---------+----------------------+---------------------+----
-----------------:
:    0
:......................:.....................:..............
.......:
:    1    :The Root of the       :The Root of the      :The
Root of the      :
:         :  Powers of Water.    :  Powers of Air.     :
Powers of Earth.   :
:         :                      :                     :
:
:    2    :Venus in Cancer Love. :Moon in Libra
:Jupiter in Capricorn :
:         :                      :  The Lord of        :
The Lord of        :
:         :                      :  Peace restored.    :
Harmonious Change  :
:         :                      :                     :
:
:    3    :Mercury in Cancer     :Saturn in Libra      :Mars
in Capricorn    :
:         :  Abundance.          :   Sorrow.           :
Material Works.    :
:         :                      :                     :
:
:    4    :Moon in Cancer        :Jupiter in Libra     :Sun
in Capricorn     :
:         :  Blended Pleasure.   :  Rest from Strife.  :
Earthly Power.     :
:         :                      :                     :
:
:    5    :Mars in Scorpio       :Venus in Aquarius
:Mercury in Taurus    :
:         :  Loss in Pleasure.   :   Defeat.           :
Material Trouble. :
:         :                      :                     :
:
:    6    :Sun in Scorpio        :Mercury in Aquarius  :Moon
in Taurus       :
:         :  Pleasure.           :  Earned Success.    :
Material Success. :
:         :                      :                     :
:
:    7    :Venus in Scorpio      :Moon in Aquarius
:Saturn in Taurus     :
:         :  Illusionary Success.:  Unstable Effort.   :
Success Unfulfilled.:
:         :                      :                     :
:
:    8    :Saturn in Pisces      :Jupiter in Gemini    :Sun
in Virgo         :
:         :  Abandoned Success.  :  Shortened Force.   :
Prudence.          :
:         :                      :                     :
:
:    9    :Jupiter in Pisces     :Mars in Gemini
:Venus in Virgo       :
:         :  Material Happiness. :  Despair & Cruelty. :
Material Gain.     :
:         :                      :                     :
:
:   10    :Mars in Pisces        :Sun in Gemini
:Mercury in Virgo     :
:         :  Perfected Success.  :  Ruin.              :
Wealth.            :
:         :                      :                     :
:
:         :                      :                     :
:
{WEH NOTE: Two typos have been corrected in column CXXXIV by
Liber 777: 4, Moon in place of Sun and 6, Sun in place of
Moon.}
                                {321}



                             TABLE V

.=========.====================.===================.========
===========.
:         :      CXXXVII       :     CXXXVIII      :
CXXXIX        :
:KEY SCALE:    SIGNS OF THE    : PLANETS RULING IN : PLANETS
EXALTED IN:
:         :      ZODIAC        :  COLUMN CCXXXVII  :
COLUMN CXXXVII  :
:---------+--------------------+-------------------+--------
-----------:
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   15    :    Aries           :     Mars          :  P. M.
(Sun)      :
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   16    :    Taurus          :     Venus         :  Uranus
(Moon)    :
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   17    :    Gemini          :     Mercury       :
Neptune          :
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   18    :    Cancer          :     Moon          :  P. M.
(Jupiter)  :
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   19    :    Leo             :     Sun           :  Uranus
:
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   20    :    Virgo           :     Mercury       :
Neptune (Mercury):
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   22    :    Libra           :     Venus         :  P. M.
(Saturn)   :
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   24    :    Scorpio         :     Mars          :  Uranus
:
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   25    :    Sagittarius     :     Jupiter       :
Neptune          :
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   26    :    Capricorn       :     Saturn        :  P. M.
(Mars)     :
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   28    :    Aquarius        :     Saturn        :  Uranus
:
:         :                    :                   :
:
:   29    :    Pisces          :     Jupiter       :
Neptune (Venus)  :
:         :                    :                   :
:
:         :                    :                   :
:
{WEH NOTE: Liber 777 gives different entries for column
CXXXIX, and these have been added in parenthesis without
deletion of original.}
                                {322}



                             TABLE I

.=========.=======.=============.=========.============.====
====.
:         : CLXXV :             :  CLXXVI :  CLXXVII   :
CLXXIX :
:KEY SCALE:HEBREW :   ENGLISH   :NUMERICAL: YETZIRATIC
:NUMBERS :
:         :LETTERS:  VALUES OF  :  VALUE  :ATTRIBUTION
:PRINTED :
:         :       :   HEBREW    :OF COLUMN: OF COLUMN  :ON
TAROT:
:         :       :   LETTERS   :  CLXXV  :   CLXXV    :
:
:---------+-------+-------------+---------+------------+----
----:
:11       :Aleph  :A Aleph      :    1    : Air        :   0
:
:   12    :Bet    :B Beth       :    2    : Mercury    :   1
:
:   13    :Gemel  :G Gimel      :    3    : Moon       :   2
:
:   14    :Dalet  :D Daleth     :    4    : Venus      :   3
:
:      15 :Heh    :H He         :    5    : Aries      :   4
:
:      16 :Vau    :V or W Vau   :    6    : Taurus     :   5
:
:      17 :Zain   :Z Zain       :    7    : Gemini     :   6
:
:      18 :Chet   :Ch Cheth     :    8    : Cancer     :   7
:
:      19 :Tet    :T Teth       :    9    : Leo        :  11
:
:      20 :Yod    :Y Yod        :   10    : Virgo      :   9
:
:   21    :Koph,Kf:K Kaph       : 20, 500 : Jupiter    :  10
:
:      22 :Lamed  :L Lamed      :   30    : Libra      :   8
:
:23       :Mem,M-f:M Mem        : 40, 600 : Water      :  12
:
:      24 :Nun,N-f:N Nun        : 50, 700 : Scorpio    :  13
:
:      25 :Samekh :S Samekh     :   60    : Sagittarius:  14
:
:      26 :Ayin   :O Ayin       :   70    : Capricorn  :  15
:
:   27    :Peh,P-f:P Pe         : 80, 800 : Mars       :  16
:
:      28 :Tzaddi,:Tz Tzaddi    : 90, 900 : Aquarius   :  17
:
:         : Tz-f  :             :         :            :
:
:      29 :Qof    :(K soft) Qoph:  100    : Pisces     :  18
:
:   30    :Resh   :R Resh       :  200    : Sun        :  19
:
:31       :Shin   :Sh Shin      :  300    : Fire       :  20
:
:   32    :Taw    :(T soft) Tau :  400    : Saturn     :  21
:
:32 "bis" :Taw    :.............:  400    : Earth      :  --
:
:31 "bis" :Shin   :.............:  300    : Spirit     :  --
:
:---------.-------.-------------.---------.------------.----
----:
:              NOTE.  "Ch" like "ch" in "loch".
:
:
:
{WEH NOTE: The English value in row 27 has been corrected,
original had O.}
                                -323-



                             TABLE I

.=========.=================================================
========.
:         :                    CLXXX
:
:KEY SCALE:
:
:         :           TITLES OF TAROT TRUMPS
:
:---------+-------------------------------------------------
--------:
:11       :The Spirit of  'GR:Alpha-iota-theta-eta-rho
:
:   12    :The Magus of Power.
:
:   13    :The Priestess of the Silver Star.
:
:   14    :The Daughter of the Mighty Ones.
:
:       15:Sun of the Morning, Chief among the Mighty.
:
:       16:The Magus of the Eternal.
:
:       17:The Children of the voice: the Oracle of the
Mighty Gods.:
:       18:The Child of the Powers of the Waters: the Lord
of the   :
:         :    Triumph of Light.
:
:       19:The Daughter of the Flaming Sword.
:
:       20:The Prophet of the Eternal, the Magus of the
Voice of    :
:         :    Power.
:
:    21   :The Lord of the Forces of Life.
:
:       22:The Daughter of the Lords of Truth; The Ruler of
the     :
:         :    Balance.
:
:23       :The Spirit of the Mighty Waters.
:
:       24:The Child of the Great Transformers.  The Lord of
the    :
:         :    Gate of Death.
:
:       25:The Daughter of the Reconcilers, the Bringer-
forth of    :
:         :    Life.
:
:       26:The Lord of the Gates of Matter.  The Child of
the       :
:         :    forces of Time.
:
:    27   :The Lord of the Hosts of the Mighty.
:
:       28:The Daughter of the Firmament; the Dweller
between the   :
:         :    Waters.
:
:       29:The Ruler of Flux & Reflux.  The Child of the
Sons of    :
:         :    the Mighty.
:
:    30   :The Lord of the Fire of the World.
:
:31       :The Spirit of the Primal Fire.
:
:    32   :The Great One of the Night of Time.
:
:31 "bis"
:.........................................................:
:32 "bis"
:.........................................................:
:         :
:


                               {324}







                             APPENDIX VI

                       A FEW PRINCIPAL RITUALS

                         Grimorium Sanctissimum.

   Arcanum Arcanorum Quod Continet Nondum Revelandum ipsis
Regibus supremis O.T.O.  Grimorium Quod Baphomet X Degree
M... suo fecit.
      De Templo.
1.  Oriente ............... Altare
2.  Occidente ............. Tabula dei invocandi
3.  Septentrione .......... Sacerdos
4.  Meridione ............. Ignis cum thuribulo,  GR:chi.
GR:tau. GR:lambda.
5.  Centro ................ Lapis quadratus cum
         Imagine Dei
         Maximi Igentis Nefandi Ineffabilis Sanctissimi
         et cum ferro, tintinnabulo, oleo.
         Virgo.  Stet imago juxta librum GR:Theta-Epsilon-
Lambda-Eta-Mu-Alpha.

                       De ceremonio Principii.

Fiat ut in Libro DCLXXI dicitur, sed antea virgo lavata sit
cum verbis "Asperge me..."  GR:chi. GR:tau. GR:lambda., et
habilimenta ponat cum verbis "Per sanctum Mysterium,"
GR:chi. GR:tau. GR:lambda.
Ita Pyramis fiat.  Tunc virgo lavabit sacerdotem et
vestimenta ponat ut supra ordinatur.
   (Hic dicat virgo orationes dei operis).

                      De ceremonio Thuribuli.

   Manibus accedat et ignem et sacerdotem virgo, dicens:
{325}
"Accendat in nobis Dominus ignem sui amoris et flamman
aeternae caritatis.

                       De ceremonio Dedicationis.

   Invocet virgo Imaginem Dei. M.I.N.I.S. his verbis. --- Tu
qui es prater omnia... GR:chi. GR:tau. GR:lambda."
Nec relinquet alteram Imaginem.

                      De Sacrificio Summo.

   Deinde silentium frangat sacerdos cum verbis versiculi
sancti dei particularitur invocandi.
   Ineat ad Sanctum Sanctorum.
   Caveat; caveat, caveat.
   Duo qui fiunt UNUS sine intermissione verba versiculi
sancti alta voce cantent.

                       De Benedictione Benedicti.

Missa rore, dicat mulier haec verba "Quia patris et filii
s.s."  GR:chi. GR:tau. GR:lambda.

                         De Ceremonio Finis

Fiat ut in Libro DCLXXI dicitur.  GR:Alpha-Upsilon-Mu-Gamma-
Nu.


                              {326}




                            LIBER XXV

                          THE STAR RUBY.

   Facing East, in the centre, draw deep deep deep thy
breath closing thy mouth with thy right forefinger prest
against thy lower lip.  Then dashing down the hand with a
great sweep back and out, expelling forcibly thy breath, cry
GR:Alpha-Pi-Omicron  GR:Pi-Alpha-Nu-Tau-Omicron-Sigma
GR:Kappa-Alpha-Kappa-Omicron-Delta-Alpha-Iota-Mu-Omicron-Nu-
Omicron-Sigma.
   With the same forefinger touch thy forehead, and say
GR:Sigma-Omicron-Iota, thy member, and say  GR:Omega  GR:Phi-
Alpha-Lambda-Lambda-Epsilon<<The secret sense of these words
is to be sought in the numeration thereof.>>, thy right
shoulder, and say  GR:Iota-Sigma-Chi-Upsilon-Rho-Omicron-
Sigma, thy left shoulder, and say  GR:Epsilon-Upsilon-Chi-
Alpha-Rho-Iota-Sigma-Tau-Omicron-Sigma; then clasp thine
hands, locking the fingers, and cry  GR:Iota-Alpha-Omega.
Advance to the East.  Imagine strongly a Pentagram, aright,
in thy forehead.  Drawing the hands to the eyes, fling it
forth, making the sign of Horus and roar
 GR:Theta-Eta-Rho-Iota-Omicron-Nu.  Retire thine hand in the
sign of Hoor-paar-Kraat.
   Go round to the North and repeat; but say NUIT.
   Go round to the West and repeat; but whisper BABALON.
   Go round to the South and repeat; but bellow HADIT.
   Completing the circle widdershins, retire to the centre
and raise thy voice in the Paian, with these words  GR:Iota-
Omega  GR:Pi-Alpha-Nu, with the signs of N.O.X.
   Extend the arms in the form of a Tau and say low but
clear:
 GR:Pi-Rho-Omicron  GR:Mu-Omicron-Upsilon  GR:Iota-Upsilon-
Gamma-Gamma-Epsilon-Sigma  GR:Omicron-Pi-Iota-Chi-Omega
GR:Mu-Omicron-Upsilon  GR:Tau-Epsilon-Lambda-Epsilon-Tau-
Alpha-Rho-Chi-Alpha-Iota  GR:Epsilon-Pi-Iota  GR:Delta-
Epsilon-Xi-Iota-Alpha  GR:Chi-Upsilon-Nu-Omicron-Chi-Epsilon-
Sigma  GR:Epsilon-Pi-Alpha-Rho-Iota-Sigma-Tau-Epsilon-Rho-
Alpha  GR:Delta-Alpha-Iota-Mu-Omicron-Nu-Omicron-Sigma
GR:Phi-Epsilon-Gamma  GR:Epsilon-Iota  GR:Gamma-Alpha-Rho
GR:Pi-Epsilon-Rho-Iota  GR:Mu-Omicron-Upsilon  GR:Omicron
GR:Alpha-Sigma-Tau-Eta-Rho  GR:Tau-Omega-Nu  GR:Pi-Epsilon-
Nu-Tau-Epsilon GR:Kappa-Alpha-Iota  GR:Epsilon-Nu  GR:Tau-
Eta-Iota  GR:Sigma-Tau-Eta-Lambda-Eta-Iota  GR:Omega
GR:Alpha-Sigma-Tau-Eta-Rho  GR:Tau-Omega-Nu  GR:Epsilon-Xi
GR:Epsilon-Sigma-Tau-Eta-Chi-Epsilon.
   Repeat the Cross Qabalistic, as above, and end as thou
didst begin.

{327}



                             LIBER XXXVI

                          THE STAR SAPPHIRE.


   Let the Adept be armed with his Magick Rood [and provided
with his mystic Rose].
   In the centre, let him give the L.V.X. signs; or if he
know them, if he will and dare do them, and can keep silent
about them, the signs of N.O.X. being the signs of Puer,
Vir, Puella, Mulier.  Omit the sign. I.R.
   Then let him advance to the East and make the Holy
Hexagram, saying: "Pater et Mater unus deus Ararita."
   Let him go round to the South, make the Holy Hexagram and
say: "Mater et Filius unus deus Ararita."
   Let him go round to the North, make the Holy Hexagram and
then say: "Filia et Pater unus deus Ararita."
   Let him then return to the Centre, and so to The Centre
of All (making the "Rosy Cross" as he may know how) saying
"Ararita Ararita Ararita". (In this the Signs shall be those
of Set Triumphant and of Baphomet.  Also shall Set appear in
the Circle.  Let him drink of the Sacrament and let him
communicate the same.)  Then let him say:  "Omnia in Duos:
Duo in Unum: Unus in Nihil: Haec nec Quatuor nec Omnia nec
Duo nec Unus nec Nihil Sunt.
   Gloria Patri et Matri et Filio et Filiae et Spiritui
Sancto externo et Spiritui Sancto interno ut erat est erit
in saecula Saeculorum sex in uno per nomen Septem in uno
Ararita."
   Let him then repeat the signs of L.V.X. but not the signs
of N.O.X.: for it is not he that shall arise in the Sign of
Isis Rejoicing.

 {328}




                              LIBER XLIV

                       THE MASS OF THE PHOENIX

 "The Magician, his breast bare, stands before an altar on
which are his Burin, Bell, Thurible, and two of the Cakes of
Light.  In the Sign of the Enterer he reaches West across
the Altar, and cries:"
   Hail Ra, that goest in thy bark
   Into the caverns of the Dark! "He gives the sign of
Silence, and takes the Bell, and Fire, in his hands."
   East of the Altar see me stand
   With light and musick in my hand! "He strikes Eleven
times upon the Bell" 333 - 55555 - 333 "and places the Fire
in the Thurible."
   I strike the Bell: I light the Flame;
   I utter the mysterious Name.
                        ABRAHADABRA "He strikes eleven times
upon the Bell."
   Now I begin to pray: Thou Child,
   Holy Thy name and undefiled!
   Thy reign is come; Thy will is done.
   Here is the Bread; here is the Blood.
   Bring me through midnight to the Sun!
   Save me from Evil and from Good!
   That Thy one crown of all the Ten
   Even now and here be mine.  AMEN. "He puts the first Cake
on the Fire of the Thurible."
   I burn the Incense-cake, proclaim
   These adorations of Thy name. "He makes them as in Liber
Legis, and strikes again Eleven times upon the Bell.  With
the Burin he then makes upon his breast the proper sign."
{329}

   Behold this bleeding breast of mine
   Gashed with the sacramental sign!

"He puts the second Cake to the wound."

   I stanch the Blood; the wafer soaks
   It up, and the high priest invokes!

"He eats the second Cake."

   This Bread I eat.  This Oath I swear
   As I enflame myself with prayer:
   "There is no grace: there is no guilt:
   This is the Law: DO WHAT THOU WILT!"

"He strikes Eleven times upon the Bell, and cries"

                          ABRAHADABRA.

   I entered in with woe; with mirth
   I now go forth, and with thanksgiving,
   To do my pleasure on the earth
   Among the legions of the living.

"He goeth forth."


                              {330}




                                LIBER V

                                  vel

                                REGULI.

  A.'. A.'. publication in Class D.  Being the Ritual of the
Mark of the Beast: an incantation proper to invoke the
Energies of the Aeon of Horus, adapted for the daily use of
the Magician of whatever grade.

                          THE FIRST GESTURE.

   The Oath of the Enchantment, which is called The
Elevenfold Seal.

"The Animadversion towards the Aeon."
  1. Let the Magician, robed and armed as he may deem to be
     fit, turn his face towards Boleskine,<<Boleskine House
is on Loch Ness, 17 miles from Inverness, Latitude 57.14 N.
Longitude 4.28 W.>> that is the House of
     The Beast 666.
  2. Let him strike the battery 1-3-3-3-1.
  3. Let him put the Thumb of his right hand between its
index
     and medius, and make the gestures hereafter following.

"The Vertical Component of the Enchantment."
  1. Let him describe a circle about his head, crying NUIT!
  2. Let him draw the Thumb vertically downward and touch
     the Muladhara Cakkra, crying, HADIT!
  3. Let him, retracing the line, touch the centre of his
breast
     an cry RA-HOOR-KHUIT!

"The Horizontal Components of the Enchantment."
  1. Let him touch the Centre of his Forehead, his mouth,
and
     his larynx, crying AIWAZ!
  2. Let him draw his thumb from right to left 

